                             More Praise for
           The Warren Buffett Way, First Edition
“The Warren Buf fett Way outlines his career and presents examples of how
his investment techniques and methods evolved and the important individu-
als in the process. It also details the key investment decisions that produced
his unmatched record of performance. Finally, the book contains the think-
ing and the philosophy of an investor that consistently made money using
the tools available to every citizen no matter what their level of wealth.”
                              Peter S. Lynch
                              bestselling author, One Up On Wall Street
                              and Beating the Street
“Robert Hagstrom presents an in-depth examination of Warren Buffett’s
strategies, and the ‘how and why’ behind his selection of each of the major se-
curities that have contributed to his remarkable record of success. His ‘home-
spun’ wisdom and philosophy are also part of this comprehensive, interesting,
and readable book.”
                              John C. Bogle
                              Chairman, The Vanguard Group
“Warren Buffett is surely the Greatest Investor of this century—not so much
because he built a great fortune with a free market as because he shared his
important thinking with us and has openly demonstrated the sagacity and
courage so vital to success. Berkshire Hathaway has been my largest, longest
investment. Warren has been my best teacher.”
                              Charles D. Ellis
                              Managing Partner, Greenwich Associates

“Warren Buffett is often characterized simply as a ‘value investor’ or a ‘Ben
Graham disciple.’ Hagstrom fills in the rest of the story with some im-
mensely practical pointers on prospering in the market.”
                              Martin S. Fridson
                              Managing Director, Merrill Lynch

“In simple language, this book tells the rules by which the most successful
American stock investor of modern time got that way. It could be a godsend
to the legion of unhappy investors who keep f loundering because they ignore
the basics of major investment success.”
                              Phil Fisher
                              author, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits
THE
WA R R E N
BU F F E T T
WAY
THE
WA R R E N
BUF F E T T
WAY
Second Edition



ROBERT G. HAGSTROM




John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Copyright © 2005 by Robert G. Hagstrom. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-6011,
fax 201-748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and
specif ically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or f itness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives
or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of prof it or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at
800-762-2974, outside the United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about
Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
ISBN 0-471-64811-6
Printed in the United States of America.
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1
                         Contents

Foreword to the Second Edition                   vii
    Bill Miller
Foreword to the First Edition                     ix
    Peter S. Lynch
Preface                                           xv
Introduction                                     xix
     Kenneth L. Fisher

 1 The World’s Greatest Investor                   1

 2 The Education of Warren Buffett                11

 3 “Our Main Business Is Insurance”: The Early
   Days of Berkshire Hathaway                     29

 4 Buying a Business                              41

 5 Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets          61

 6 Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets        81

 7 Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets        109

 8 Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets            121

                                                   v
vi      CONTENTS

 9 Investing in Fixed-Income Securities            141

10 Managing Your Portfolio                         157

11 The Psychology of Money                         177

12 The Unreasonable Man                            189

Afterword: Managing Money the Warren Buffett Way   199

Appendix                                           211

Notes                                              225

Acknowledgments                                    235

Index                                              239
             Foreword to the
              Second Edition


W
         hen Robert Hagstrom first published The Warren Buf fett Way
         in 1994, it quickly became a phenomenon. To date, more than
         1.2 million copies have been sold. The book’s popularity is a
testimony to the accuracy of its analysis and the value of its advice.
     Any time the subject is Warren Buffett, it is easy to become over-
whelmed by the sheer size of the numbers. Whereas most investors
think in terms of hundreds or perhaps thousands, Buffett moves in a
world of millions and billions. But that does not mean he has nothing
to teach us. Quite the opposite. If we look at what he does and has
done, and are able to discern the underlying thinking, we can model
our decisions on his.
     That is the profound contribution of Robert’s book. He closely
studied Warren Buffett’s actions, words, and decisions for a number of
years, and then set about analyzing them for common threads. For this
book, he distilled those common threads into twelve tenets, timeless
principles that guide Buffett’s investment philosophy through all cir-
cumstances and all markets. In just the same way, they can guide any
investor.
     The enduring value of Robert’s work is due to this clear focus—al-
though the book talks about investment techniques, it is fundamentally
about investment principles. And principles do not change. I can almost

                                                                    vii
viii     FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION

hear Warren saying, with his wry smile, “That’s why they call them
principles.”
    The past ten years have given us a vivid demonstration of that basic
truth. In those ten years, the trends of the stock market changed several
times over. We witnessed a high-f lying bubble that made many people
rich, and then a steep crash into a protracted, painful bear market be-
fore the market finally hit bottom in the spring of 2003 and started to
turn back up.
    All along the way, Warren Buffett’s investment approach never
changed. He has continued to follow the same principles outlined in
this book:

       • Think of buying stocks as buying fractional interests in whole
         businesses.
       • Construct a focused low-turnover portfolio
       • Invest in only what you can understand and analyze
       • Demand a margin of safety between the purchase price and the
         company’s long-term value

    Berkshire Hathaway investors, as usual, reap the benefits of that
steady approach. Since the recovery began in 2003, Berkshire Hathaway
stock is up about $20,000 per share, more than 30 percent, far surpass-
ing the returns of the overall market over the comparable period.
    There is a chain of thinking for value investors that begins with
Benjamin Graham, through Warren Buffett and his contemporaries, to
the next generation of practitioners such as Robert Hagstrom. Buffett,
Graham’s best-known disciple, frequently advises investors to study
Graham’s book The Intelligent Investor. I often make the same recom-
mendation myself. And I am convinced that Robert’s work shares with
that classic book one critical quality: the advice may not make you rich,
but it is highly unlikely to make you poor. If understood and intelli-
gently implemented, the techniques and principles presented here should
make you a better investor.

                                BILL MILLER
                                CEO, Legg Mason Capital Management
              Foreword to the
                First Edition

O
        ne weekday evening early in 1989 I was home when the tele-
        phone rang. Our middle daughter, Annie, then eleven, was first
        to the phone. She told me that Warren Buffett was calling. I was
convinced this had to be a prank. The caller started by saying, “This is
Warren Buffett from Omaha [as if I might confuse him with some other
Warren Buffett]. I just finished your book, I loved it, and I would like to
quote one of your sentences in the Berkshire annual report. I have always
wanted to do a book, but I never have gotten around to it.” He spoke
very rapidly with lots of enthusiasm and must have said forty words in
fifteen or twenty seconds, including a couple of laughs and chuckles. I
instantly agreed to his request and I think we talked for five or ten min-
utes. I remember he closed by saying, “If you ever visit Omaha and
don’t come by and see me, your name will be mud in Nebraska.”
     Clearly not wanting my name to be mud in Nebraska, I took him
up on his offer about six months later. Warren Buffett gave me a per-
sonal tour of every square foot of the office (which did not take long, as
the whole operation could fit inside less than half of a tennis court), and
I said hello to all eleven employees. There was not a computer or a stock
quotation machine to be found.
     After about an hour we went to a local restaurant where I followed
his lead and had a terrific steak and my first cherry Coke in thirty
years. We talked about jobs we had as children, baseball, and bridge, and

                                                                         ix
x    FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION

exchanged stories about companies in which we had held investments
in the past. Warren discussed or answered questions about each stock
and operation that Berkshire (he never called his company Berkshire
Hathaway) owned.
     Why has Warren Buffett been the best investor in history? What is
he like as an individual, a shareholder, a manager, and an owner of entire
companies? What is so unique about the Berkshire Hathaway annual re-
port, why does he donate so much effort to it, and what can someone
learn from it? To attempt to answer those questions, I talked with him
directly, and reread the last five annual reports and his earliest reports as
chairman (the 1971 and 1972 reports each had only two pages of text).
In addition, I had discussions with nine individuals that have been ac-
tively involved with Warren Buffett in varied relationships and from dif-
ferent viewpoints during the past four to over thirty years: Jack Byrne,
Robert Denham, Don Keough, Carol Loomis, Tom Murphy, Charlie
Munger, Carl Reichardt, Frank Rooney, and Seth Schofield.
     In terms of his personal qualities, the responses were quite consis-
tent. Warren Buffett is, first of all, very content. He loves everything
he does, dealing with people and reading mass quantities of annual and
quarterly reports and numerous newspapers and periodicals. As an in-
vestor he has discipline, patience, f lexibility, courage, confidence, and
decisiveness. He is always searching for investments where risk is
eliminated or minimized. In addition, he is very adept at probability
and as an oddsmaker. I believe this ability comes from an inherent love
of simple math computations, his devotion and active participation in
the game of bridge, and his long experience in underwriting and ac-
cepting high levels of risk in insurance and in reinsurance. He is will-
ing to take risks where the odds of total loss are low and upside
rewards are substantial. He lists his failures and mistakes and does not
apologize. He enjoys kidding himself and compliments his associates in
objective terms.
     Warren Buffett is a great student of business and a wonderful lis-
tener, and able to determine the key elements of a company or a com-
plex issue with high speed and precision. He can make a decision not to
invest in something in as little as two minutes and conclude that it is
time to make a major purchase in just a few days of research. He is al-
ways prepared, for as he has said in an annual report, “Noah did not start
building the Ark when it was raining.”
                                  Foreword to the First Edition         xi

     As a manager he almost never calls a division head or the chief exec-
utive of a company but is delighted at any time of the day or night for
them to call him to report something or seek counsel. After investing in
a stock or purchasing an entire operation, he becomes a cheerleader and
sounding board: “At Berkshire we don’t tell 400% hitters how to swing,”
using an analogy to baseball management.
     Two examples of Warren Buffett’s willingness to learn and adapt
himself are public speaking and computer usage. In the 1950s Warren
invested $100 in a Dale Carnegie course “not to prevent my knees from
knocking when public speaking but to do public speaking while my
knees are knocking.” At the Berkshire annual meeting in front of more
than 2,000 people, Warren Buffett sits on a stage with Charlie Munger,
and, without notes, lectures and responds to questions in a fashion that
would please Will Rogers, Ben Graham, King Solomon, Phil Fisher,
David Letterman, and Billy Crystal. To be able to play more bridge,
early in 1994 Warren learned how to use a computer so he could join a
network where you can play with other individuals from their locations
all over the country. Perhaps in the near future he will begin to use
some of the hundreds of data retrieval and information services on com-
panies that are available on computers today for investment research.
     Warren Buffett stresses that the critical investment factor is deter-
mining the intrinsic value of a business and paying a fair or bargain
price. He doesn’t care what the general stock market has done recently
or will do in the future. He purchased over $1 billion of Coca-Cola in
1988 and 1989 after the stock had risen over fivefold the prior six years
and over five-hundredfold the previous sixty years. He made four times
his money in three years and plans to make a lot more the next five,
ten, and twenty years with Coke. In 1976 he purchased a very major
position in GEICO when the stock had declined from $61 to $2 and
the general perception was that the stock was definitely going to zero.
     How can the average investor employ Warren Buffett’s methods?
Warren Buffett never invests in businesses he cannot understand or that
are outside his “Circle of Competence.” All investors can, over time,
obtain and intensify their “Circle of Competence” in an industry where
they are professionally involved or in some sector of business they enjoy
researching. One does not have to be correct very many times in a life-
time as Warren states that twelve investments decisions in his forty year
career have made all the difference.
xii   FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION

     Risk can be reduced greatly by concentrating on only a few holdings
if it forces investors to be more careful and thorough in their research.
Normally more than 75 percent of Berkshire’s common stock holdings
are represented by only five different securities. One of the principles
demonstrated clearly several times in this book is to buy great businesses
when they are having a temporary problem or when the stock market
declines and creates bargain prices for outstanding franchises. Stop try-
ing to predict the direction of the stock market, the economy, interest
rates, or elections, and stop wasting money on individuals that do this
for a living. Study the facts and the financial condition, value the com-
pany’s future outlook, and purchase when everything is in your favor.
Many people invest in a way similar to playing poker all night without
ever looking at their cards.
     Very few investors would have had the knowledge and courage to
purchase GEICO at $2.00 or Wells Fargo or General Dynamics when
they were depressed as there were numerous learned people saying those
companies were in substantial trouble. However, Warren Buffett’s pur-
chase of Capital Cities/ABC, Gillette, Washington Post, Affiliated Pub-
lications, Freddie Mac, or Coca-Cola (which have produced over $6
billion of profits for Berkshire Hathaway, or 60 percent of the $10 bil-
lion of shareholders’ equity) were all well-run companies with strong
histories of profitability, and were dominant business franchises.
     In addition to his own shareholders, Warren Buffett uses the Berk-
shire annual report to help the general public become better investors.
On both sides of his family he descended from newspaper editors, and
his Aunt Alice was a public school teacher for more than thirty years.
Warren Buffett enjoys both teaching and writing about business in gen-
eral and investing in particular. He taught on a volunteer basis when he
was twenty-one at the University of Nebraska in Omaha. In 1955, when
he was working in New York City, he taught an adult education course
on the stock market at Scarsdale High School. For ten years in the late
1960s and 1970s he gave a free lecture course at Creighton University.
In 1977 he served on a committee headed by Al Sommer Jr., to advise
the Securities and Exchange Commission on corporate disclosure. After
that involvement, the scale of the Berkshire annual report changed dra-
matically with the 1977 report written in late 1977 and early 1978. The
format became more similar to the partnership reports he produced
from 1956 to 1969.
                                 Foreword to the First Edition         xiii

     Since the early 1980s, the Berkshire annual reports have informed
shareholders of the performance of the holdings of the company and new
investments, updated the status of the insurance and the reinsurance in-
dustry, and (since 1982) have listed acquisition criteria about businesses
Berkshire would like to purchase. The report is generously laced with ex-
amples, analogies, stories, and metaphors containing the do’s and don’ts
of proper investing in stocks.
     Warren Buffett has established a high standard for the future per-
formance of Berkshire by setting an objective of growing intrinsic value
by 15 percent a year over the long term, something few people, and no
one from 1956 to 1993 besides himself, have ever done. He has stated it
will be a difficult standard to maintain due to the much larger size of
the company, but there are always opportunities around and Berkshire
keeps lots of cash ready to invest and it grows every year. His confi-
dence is somewhat underlined by the final nine words of the June 1993
annual report on page 60: “Berkshire has not declared a cash dividend
since 1967.”
     Warren Buffett has stated that he has always wanted to write a book
on investing. Hopefully that will happen some day. However, until that
event, his annual reports are filling that function in a fashion somewhat
similar to the nineteenth-century authors who wrote in serial form:
Edgar Allen Poe, William Makepeace Thackery, and Charles Dickens.
The Berkshire Hathaway annual reports from 1977 through 1993 are
seventeen chapters of that book. And also in the interim we now have
The Warren Buf fett Way, in which Robert Hagstrom outlines Buf-
fett’s career and presents examples of how his investment technique and
methods evolved as well as the important individuals in that process.
The book also details the key investment decisions that produced Buf-
fett’s unmatched record of performance. Finally, it contains the think-
ing and the philosophy of an investor that consistently made money
using the tools available to every citizen no matter their level of wealth.

                                                        PETER S. LYNCH
                          Preface


A
       lmost exactly twenty years ago, while training to become an in-
       vestment broker with Legg Mason, I received a Berkshire Hath-
       away annual report as part of the training materials. It was my
very first exposure to Warren Buffett.
     Like most people who read Berkshire’s annual reports, I was in-
stantly impressed with the clarity of Buffett’s writing. As a young pro-
fessional during the 1980s, I found that my head was perpetually
spinning as I tried to keep up with the stock market, the economy, and
the constant buying and selling of securities. Yet, each time I read a
story about Warren Buffett or an article written by him, his rational
voice seemed to rise above the market’s chaos. It was his calming inf lu-
ence that inspired me to write this book.
     The principal challenge I faced writing The Warren Buf fett Way
was to prove or disprove Buffett’s claim that “what [I] do is not beyond
anybody else’s competence.” Some critics argue that, despite his success,
Warren Buffett’s idiosyncrasies mean his investment approach cannot be
widely adopted. I disagree. Warren Buffett is idiosyncratic—it is a source
of his success—but his methodology, once understood, is applicable to
individuals and institutions alike. My goal in this book is to help in-
vestors employ the strategies that make Warren Buffett successful.
     The Warren Buf fett Way describes what is, at its core, a simple ap-
proach. There are no computer programs to learn, no two-inch-thick
investment manuals to decipher. Whether you are financially able to

                                                                       xv
xvi    P R E FA C E

purchase 10 percent of a company or merely a hundred shares, this book
can help you achieve profitable investment returns.
     But do not judge yourself against Warren Buffett. His five decades
of simultaneously owning and investing in businesses make it improba-
ble that you can imitate his historical investment returns. Instead, com-
pare your ongoing results against your peer group, whether that group
includes actively managed mutual funds, an index fund, or the broader
market in general.
     The original edition of this book enjoyed remarkable success, and I
am deeply gratified that so many people found it useful. The success of
The Warren Buf fett Way, however, is first and foremost a testament to
Warren Buffett. His wit and integrity have charmed millions of people
worldwide; and his intellect and investment record have, for years, mes-
merized the professional investment community, me included. This un-
paralleled combination makes Warren Buffett the single most popular
role model in investing today.
     I had never met Warren Buffett before writing this book, and I did
not consult with him while developing it. Although consultation
surely would have been a bonus, I was fortunate to be able to draw
from his extensive writings on investing that date back more than four
decades. Throughout the book, I have employed extensive quotes from
Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports, especially the famous Chair-
man’s Letters. Mr. Buffett granted permission to use this copyrighted
material, but only after he had reviewed the book. This permission in
no way implies that he cooperated on the book or that he made avail-
able to me secret documents or strategies that are not already available
from his public writings.
     Almost everything Buffett does is public, but it is loosely noted.
What was needed, in my opinion, and what would be valuable to in-
vestors, was a thorough examination of his thoughts and strategies
aligned with the purchases that Berkshire made over the years, all com-
piled in one source. And that was the starting point for the original
edition of The Warren Buf fett Way.
     This revised edition, ten years later, retains that basic goal: to ex-
amine Buffett’s more recent actions for the investment lessons they hold
and to consider whether changes in the financial climate have triggered
changes in his strategies.
                                                             Preface     xvii

     Some things became clear quickly. Buffett’s level of activity in the
stock market has dropped off significantly in recent years; he has bought
entire companies more often than he has bought shares. He has on oc-
casion moved more strongly into bonds—investment-grade corporate,
government, even high-yield—and then, when they became less attrac-
tive, moved out again.
     Some of these newly acquired companies are profiled in the chapters
that follow, along with a discussion of how the characteristics of those
companies ref lect the tenets of the Warren Buffett Way. However, since
many of these companies were privately held before Buffett bought
them, the specifics of their financial data were not publicly available. I
cannot, therefore, discern with any confidence what Buffett might have
thought of those companies’ economic conditions, other than to say that
he clearly liked what he saw.
     For this updated edition, I also took the opportunity to incorporate
some material that was not presented in the original book. I added a
chapter on Buffett’s style of portfolio management, a style he has labeled
“focus investing.” It is a cornerstone of his success, and I highly recom-
mend it. I also included a chapter on the psychology of money, the many
ways that emotion plays havoc with good decisions. To invest wisely, it
is necessary to become aware of all the temptations to behave foolishly.
It is necessary for two reasons: If you know how to recognize the emo-
tional potholes, you can avoid tripping into them. And you will be able
to recognize the missteps of others in time to profit from their mistakes.
     Ten years is either a very long time, or not long at all, depending on
your circumstances and your personal view of the world. For investors,
what we can say is that during these ten years, context has changed but
the basics have not. That’s good, because in another ten years the con-
text can change back again, or change in an entirely different direction.
Those who remain grounded in basic principles can survive those up-
heavals far better than those who do not.
     In the ten years since I wrote The Warren Buf fett Way, the noise
level in the stock market has continued to rise, sometimes to a deafening
screech. Television commentators, financial writers, analysts, and market
strategists are all overtalking each other to get investors’ attention. At the
same time, many investors are immersed in Internet chat rooms and mes-
sage boards exchanging questionable information and misleading tips.
xviii   P R E FA C E

Yet, despite all this available information, investors find it increasingly
difficult to earn a profit. Some are hard pressed even to continue. Stock
prices skyrocket with little reason, then plummet just as quickly. People
who have turned to investing for their children’s education and their
own retirement are constantly frightened. There appears to be neither
rhyme nor reason to the market, only folly.
     Far above the market madness stand the wisdom and counsel of
Warren Buffett. In an environment that seems to favor the speculator
over the investor, Buffett’s investment advice has proven, time and
again, to be a safe harbor for millions of lost investors. Occasionally,
misaligned investors will yell out, “But it’s different this time”; and oc-
casionally they will be right. Politics spring surprises, markets react,
then economics reverberate in a slightly different tone. New companies
are constantly born while others mature. Industries evolve and adapt.
Change is constant, but the investment principles outlined in this book
have remained the same.
     Here is a succinct and powerful lesson from the 1996 annual report:
“Your goal as an investor should be simply to purchase, at a rational
price, a part interest in an easily understood business whose earnings are
virtually certain to be materially higher, five, ten, and twenty years from
now. Over time, you will find only a few companies that meet those
standards—so when you see one that qualifies, you should buy a mean-
ingful amount of stock.”
     Whatever level of funds you have available for investing, whatever
industry or company you are interested in, you cannot find a better
touchstone than that.

                                                 ROBERT G. HAGSTROM

Villanova, Pennsylvania
September 2004
                     Introduction


M
        y father, Philip A. Fisher, looked with great pride on Warren
        Buffett’s adoption of some of his views and their long and
        friendly relationship. If my father had been alive to write this
introduction, he would have jumped at the chance to share some of the
good feelings he experienced over the decades from his acquaintance
with one of the very few men whose investment star burned so brightly
as to make his dim by comparison. My father genuinely liked Warren
Buffett and was honored that Buffett embraced some of his ideas. My
father died at 96—exactly three months before I received an unex-
pected letter asking if I would write about my father and Warren Buf-
fett. This introduction has helped me to connect some dots and provide
some closure regarding my father and Mr. Buffett. For readers of The
Warren Buf fett Way, I hope I can provide a very personal look into an
important piece of investment history and some thoughts on how to
best use this wonderful book.
     There is little I will say about Mr. Buffett since that is the subject of
this book and Robert Hagstrom covers that ground with grace and in-
sight. It’s well known that my father was an important inf luence on
Warren Buffett and, as Mr. Hagstrom writes, my father’s inf luence fig-
ured more prominently in Buffett’s thinking in recent years. For his
part, as my father became acquainted with Warren Buffett, he grew to
admire qualities in him that he felt were essential to investing success
but are rare among investment managers.

                                                                          xix
xx    INTRODUCTION

     When he visited my father 40 years ago, in a world with relatively
primitive information tools by today’s standards, my father had his own
ways of gathering information. He slowly built a circle of acquaintances
over the decades—investment professionals he respected and who knew
him well enough to understand what he was and wasn’t interested in—
and who might share good ideas with him. Toward that end, he con-
cluded that he would meet any young investment professional once. If he
was impressed, he might see him again and build a relationship. He
rarely saw anyone twice. Very high standards! In his mind, if you didn’t
get an “A” you got an “F.” And once he had judged against someone, he
simply excluded that person, forever. One shot at building a relationship.
Time was scarce.
     Warren Buffett as a young man was among the very, very few who
impressed my father sufficiently in his first meeting to merit a second
meeting and many more meetings after that. My father was a shrewd
judge of character and skill. Unusually so! He based his career on judg-
ing people. It was one of his best qualities and a major reason why he put
so much emphasis on qualitative judgment of business management in
his stock analysis. He was always very proud he picked Warren Buffett as
an “A” before Buffett had won his much-deserved fame and acclaim.
     The relationship between Warren Buffett and my father survived
my father’s occasional lapses when he would mistakenly call Mr. Buffett
“Howard.” This is an unusual story that has never been told and perhaps
says much about both my father and Warren Buffett.
     My father was a small man with a big mind that raced intensely.
While kindly, he was nervous, often agitated, and personally insecure.
He was also very, very much a creature of habit. He followed daily cat-
echisms rigorously because they made him more secure. And he loved to
sleep, because when he slept, he wasn’t nervous or insecure. So when he
couldn’t stop his mind from racing at night, which was often, he played
memory games instead of counting sheep. One sleep game he played was
memorizing the names and districts of all the members of Congress until
he drifted off.
     Starting in 1942, he memorized the name of Howard Buffett and as-
sociated it with Omaha, over and over again, night after night, for
more than a decade. His brain mechanically linked the words “Omaha,”
“Buffett,” and “Howard” as a related series long before he met Warren
Buffett. Later, as Warren’s career began to build and his star rose, it was
                                                     Introduction     xxi

still fully two decades before my father could fully disentangle Buffett
and Omaha, from “Howard.” That annoyed my father because he
couldn’t control his mind and because he was fond of Warren Buffett
and valued their relationship. Father knew exactly who Warren Buffett
was but in casual conversation he often said something like, “That
bright young Howard Buffett from Omaha.” The more he said it, the
harder it became to eliminate it from his phraseology. A man of habit
habitually vexed.
     Early one morning when they were to meet, my father was intent on
sorting out “Howard” from “Warren.” Still, at one point in the conver-
sation, my father referred to Warren as “Howard.” If Warren noticed,
he gave no sign and certainly did not correct my father. This occurred
sporadically throughout the 1970s. By the 1980s, my father finally had
purged the word “Howard” from any sentence referencing Buffett. He
was actually proud when he left “Howard” behind for good. Years later,
I asked him if he ever explained this to Warren. He said he hadn’t be-
cause it embarrassed him so much.
     Their relationship survived because it was built on much stronger
stuff. I think one of the kernels of their relationship was their shared
philosophy in associating with people of integrity and skill. When
Mr. Buffett says in regard to overseeing Berkshire Hathaway managers,
“We don’t tell .400 hitters how to swing,” that is almost straight from
Phil Fisher’s playbook. Associate with the best, don’t be wrong about
that, and then don’t tell them what to do.
     Over the years, my father was very impressed with how Mr. Buffett
evolved as investor without compromising any of his core principles.
Every decade, Mr. Buffett has done things no one would have predicted
from reading about his past, and done them well. Within professional in-
vesting, most people learn in craft-like form some particular style of in-
vesting and then never change. They buy low P/E stocks or leading tech
names or whatever. They build that craft and then never change, or
change only marginally. In contrast, Warren Buffett consistently took
new approaches, decade-after-decade—so that it was impossible to pre-
dict what he might do next. You could not have predicted his 1970s fran-
chise orientation from his original strict value bent. You could not have
predicted his 1980s consumer products orientation at above market aver-
age P/Es from his previous approaches. His ability to change—and do it
successfully—could be a book unto itself. When most people attempt to
xxii   INTRODUCTION

evolve as he has—they fail. Mr. Buffett didn’t fail, my father believed,
because he never lost sight of who he was. He always remained true to
himself.
     My father was never physically far for very long from Rudyard
Kipling’s famous poem, “If.” In his desk, by his nightstand, in his den—
always close. He read it over and over and quoted it often to me. I keep
it by my desk as part of keeping him close to me. Being insecure but un-
daunted, he would tell you in Kipling-like fashion to be very serious
about your career and your investments, but do not take yourself too se-
riously. He would urge you to contemplate others’ criticisms of you, but
never consider them your judge. He would urge you to challenge your-
self, but not judge yourself too extremely either way and when in your
eyes you’ve failed, force yourself to try again. And he would urge you to
do the next thing, yet unfathomed.
     It is that part about Mr. Buffett, his knack for evolving consistent
with his values and past—doing the next thing unfathomed—that my
father most admired. Moving forward unfettered by the past restraints,
utterance, convention, or pride. Buffett, to my father’s way of think-
ing, embodied some of the qualities immortalized by Kipling.
     Unfortunately, there will always be a small percent of society, but a
large absolute number, of small-minded envious miscreants who can’t
create a life of their own. Instead they love to throw mud. The purpose
of life for these misguided souls is to attempt to create pain where they
can’t otherwise create gain. By the time a successful career concludes,
mud will have been thrown at almost everyone of any accomplishment.
And if any can stick, it will. My insecure father always expected mud
to be thrown at everyone, himself included, but for those he admired,
he hoped it would not stick. And when mud was thrown, he would
expect those he admired, in Kipling-like fashion, to contemplate the
criticism or allegation without feeling judged by it. Always through
Kipling’s eyes!
     Through a longer career than most, Warren Buffett has acquitted
himself remarkably—little mud has been thrown at him and none has
stuck. A testament indeed. Kipling would be pleased. As was my father.
It goes back to Mr. Buffett’s core values—he always knows exactly who
he is and what he is about. He isn’t tormented by conf licts of interest
that can undermine his principles and lead to less-than-admirable be-
haviors. There was no mud to throw so no mud stuck. And that is the
                                                    Introduction       xxiii

prime part of Warren Buffett you should try to emulate. Know who
you are.
     I am writing this introduction in part to suggest to you how to use
this book. Throughout my career, people have asked me why I don’t
do things more like my father did or why I don’t do things more like
Mr. Buffett. The answer is simple. I am I, not them. I have to use my
own comparative advantages. I’m not as shrewd a judge of people as my
father and I’m not the genius Buffett is.
     It is important to use this book to learn, but don’t use this book to
be like Warren Buffett. You can’t be Warren Buffett and, if you try, you
will suffer. Use this book to understand Buffett’s ideas and then take
those ideas and integrate them into your own approach to investing. It is
only from your own ideas that you create greatness. The insights in this
book are only useful when you ingest them into your own persona
rather than trying to twist your persona to fit the insights. (A twisted
persona is a lousy investor unless you’re twisted naturally.) Regardless, I
guarantee that you cannot be Warren Buffett no matter what you read
or how hard you try. You have to be yourself.
     That is the greatest lesson I got from my father, a truly great teacher
at many levels—not to be him or anyone else, but to be the best I could
evolve into, never quitting the evolution. The greatest lesson you can
glean from Warren Buffett? To learn from him without desiring to be
like him. If you’re a young reader, the greatest investment lesson is to
find who you really are. If you’re an old reader, the greatest lesson is
that you really are much younger than you think you are and you
should act that way—a rare gift. Were that not possible, then Mr. Buf-
fett wouldn’t still be ably evolving at what for most people is post-
retirement age. Think of Warren Buffett as a teacher, not a role model,
and think of this book as the single best explanation of his teachings,
well stated and easily learned. You can learn an enormous amount from
this book and that can be the foundation for developing your own suc-
cessful investment philosophy.

                                                     KENNETH L. FISHER
                                   1

              The World’s
            Greatest Investor

E
     very year, Forbes magazine publishes a list of the 400 richest Amer-
     icans, the elite Forbes 400. Individuals on the list come and go
     from year to year, as their personal circumstances change and their
industries rise and fall, but some names are constant. Among those lead-
ing the list year in and year out are certain megabillionaires who trace
their wealth to a product (computer software or hardware), a service
(retailing), or lucky parentage (inheritance). Of those perennially in the
top five, only one made his fortune through investment savvy. That
one person is Warren Buffett.
    In the early 1990s, he was number one. Then for a few years, he see-
sawed between number one and number two with a youngster named
Bill Gates. Even for the dot-com-crazed year 2000, when so much of
the wealth represented by the Forbes 400 came from the phenomenal
growth in technology, Buffett, who smilingly eschews high-tech any-
thing, was firmly in fourth position. He was still the only person in the
top five for whom the “source of wealth” column read “stock market.”
In 2004, he was solidly back in the number two position.
    In 1956, Buffett started his investment partnership with $100; after
thirteen years, he cashed out with $25 million. At the time of this writ-
ing (mid-2004), his personal net worth has increased to $42.9 billion,
the stock in his company is selling at $92,900 a share, and millions of
investors around the world hang on his every word.

                                                                        1
2    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    To fully appreciate Warren Buffett, however, we have to go beyond
the dollars, the performance accolades, and the reputation.

INVESTMENT BEGINNINGS

Warren Edward Buffett was born August 30, 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska.
His grandfather owned a grocery store (and once employed a young
Charlie Munger); his father was a local stockbroker. As a boy, Warren
Buffett was always fascinated with numbers and could easily do complex
mathematical calculations in his head. At age eight, he began reading his
father’s books on the stock market; at age eleven, he marked the board at
the brokerage house where his father worked. His early years were en-
livened with entrepreneurial ventures, and he was so successful that he
told his father he wanted to skip college and go directly into business. He
was overruled.
     Buffett attended the business school at the University of Nebraska,
and while there, he read a new book on investing by a Columbia profes-
sor named Benjamin Graham. It was, of course, The Intelligent Investor.
Buffett was so taken with Graham’s ideas that he applied to Columbia
Business School so that he could study directly with Graham. Bill Ruane,
now chairman of the Sequoia Fund, was in the same class. He recalls that
there was an instantaneous mental chemistry between Graham and Buf-
fett, and that the rest of the class was primarily an audience.1
     Not long after Buffett graduated from Columbia with a master’s de-
gree in economics, Graham invited his former student to join his com-
pany, the Graham-Newman Corporation. During his two-year tenure
there, Buffett became fully immersed in his mentor’s investment approach
(see Chapter 2 for a full discussion of Graham’s philosophy).
     In 1956, Graham-Newman disbanded. Graham, then 61, decided to
retire, and Buffett returned to Omaha. Armed with the knowledge he
had acquired from Graham, the financial backing of family and friends,
and $100 of his own money, Buffett began a limited investment part-
nership. He was twenty-five years old.

T H E B U F F E T T PA RT N E R S H I P, LT D .

The partnership began with seven limited partners who together con-
tributed $105,000. The limited partners received 6 percent annually on
                                   T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r   3

their investment and 75 percent of the profits above this bogey; the re-
maining 25 percent went to Buffett, who as general partner had essen-
tially free rein to invest the partnership’s funds.
     Over the next thirteen years, Buffett compounded money at an an-
nual rate of 29.5 percent.2 It was no easy task. Although the Dow Jones
Industrial Average declined in price five different years during that
thirteen-year period, Buffett’s partnership never had a down year. Buf-
fett, in fact, had begun the partnership with the ambitious goal of out-
performing the Dow by ten points every year. And he did it—not by
ten—but by twenty-two points!
     As Buffett’s reputation grew, more people asked him to manage
their money. For the partnership, Buffett bought controlling interests
in several public and private companies, and in 1962 he began buying
shares in an ailing textile company called Berkshire Hathaway.
     That same year, 1962, Buffett moved the partnership office from
his home to Kiewit Plaza in Omaha, where his office remains today.
The next year, he made a stunning purchase.
     Tainted by a scandal involving one of its clients, American Express
saw its shares drop from $65 to $35 almost overnight. Buffett had
learned Ben Graham’s lesson well: When stocks of a strong company are
selling below their intrinsic value, act decisively. Buffett made the bold
decision to put 40 percent of the partnership’s total assets, $13 million,
into American Express stock. Over the next two years, the shares tripled
in price, and the partners netted a cool $20 million in profit. It was pure
Graham—and pure Buffett.
     By 1965, the partnership’s assets had grown to $26 million. Four
years later, explaining that he found the market highly speculative and
worthwhile values increasingly scarce, Buffett decided to end the invest-
ment partnership.
     When the partnership disbanded, investors received their propor-
tional interests. Some of them, at Buffett’s recommendation, sought out
money manager Bill Ruane, his old classmate at Columbia. Ruane
agreed to manage their money, and thus was born the Sequoia Fund.
Others, including Buffett, invested their partnership revenues in Berk-
shire Hathaway. By that point, Buffett’s share of the partnership had
grown to $25 million, which was enough to give him control of Berk-
shire Hathaway.
     What he did with it is well known in the investment world. Even
those with only a passing interest in the stock market recognize Buffett’s
4   T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

name and know something of his stunning success. In the following
chapters, we trace the upward trajectory of Berkshire Hathaway in the
forty years that Buffett has been in control. Perhaps more important,
we also look beneath the surface to uncover the commonsense philoso-
phy on which he founded his success.


T H E M A N A N D H I S C O M PA N Y

Warren Buffett is not easy to describe. Physically, he is unremarkable,
with looks often described as grandfatherly. Intellectually, he is con-
sidered a genius; yet his down-to-earth relationship with people is
truly uncomplicated. He is simple, straightforward, forthright, and
honest. He displays an engaging combination of sophisticated dry wit
and cornball humor. He has a profound reverence for all things logical
and a foul distaste for imbecility. He embraces the simple and avoids
the complicated.
    When reading Berkshire’s annual reports, one is struck by how com-
fortable Buffett is quoting the Bible, John Maynard Keynes, or Mae
West. The operable word here is reading. Each report is sixty to seventy
pages of dense information: no pictures, no color graphics, no charts.
Those who are disciplined enough to start on page one and continue un-
interrupted are rewarded with a healthy dose of financial acumen, folksy
humor, and unabashed honesty. Buffett is candid in his reporting. He
emphasizes both the pluses and the minuses of Berkshire’s businesses. He
believes that people who own stock in Berkshire Hathaway are owners
of the company, and he tells them as much as he would like to be told if
he were in their shoes.
    When Buffett took control of Berkshire, the corporate net worth was
$22 million. Forty years later, it has grown to $69 billion. It has long
been Buffett’s goal to increase the book value of Berkshire Hathaway at
a 15 percent annual rate—well above the return achieved by the average
American company. Since he took control of Berkshire in 1964, the gain
has been much greater: Book value per share has grown from $19 to
$50,498, a rate of 22.2 percent compounded annually. This relative per-
formance is all the more impressive when you consider that Berkshire is
penalized by both income and capital gains taxes and the Standard &
Poor’s 500 returns are pretax.
Table 1.1 Berkshire’s Corporate Performance versus the S&P 500
                                                        Annual Percentage Change
                                     In Per-Share                     In S&P 500
                                    Book Value of                   with Dividends                   Relative
                                       Berkshire                       Included                      Results
Year                                      (1)                             (2)                         (1)–(2)
1965                                      23.8                            10.0                         13.8
1966                                      20.3                           (11.7)                        32.0
1967                                      11.0                            30.9                        (19.9)
1968                                      19.0                            11.0                          8.0
1969                                      16.2                            (8.4)                        24.6
1970                                      12.0                             3.9                          8.1
1971                                      16.4                            14.6                          1.8
1972                                      21.7                            18.9                          2.8
1973                                       4.7                           (14.8)                        19.5
1974                                       5.5                           (26.4)                        31.9
1975                                      21.9                            37.2                        (15.3)
1976                                      59.3                            23.6                         35.7
1977                                      31.9                            (7.4)                        39.3
1978                                      24.0                             6.4                         17.6
1979                                      35.7                            18.2                         17.5
1980                                      19.3                            32.3                        (13.0)
1981                                      31.4                            (5.0)                        36.4
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 2003 Annual Report.
Notes: Data are for calendar years with these exceptions: 1965 and 1966, year ended 9/30; 1967, 15 months
ended 12/31.
     Starting in 1979, accounting rules required insurance companies to value the equity securities they hold
at market rather than at the lower of cost or market, which was previusly the requirement. In this table, Berk-
shire’s results through 1978 have been restated to conform to the changed rules. In all other respects, the re-
sults are calculated using the numbers originally reported.
     The S&P 500 numbers are pre-tax whereas the Berkshire numbers are after-tax. If a corporation such as
Berkshire were simply to have owned the S&P 500 and accrued the appropriate taxes, its results would have
lagged the S&P 500 in years when that index showed a positive return, but would have exceeded the S&P in
years when the index showed a negative return. Over the years, the tax costs would have caused the aggre-
gate lag to be substantial.
                                                                                                (continued)




                                                                                                               5
Table 1.1 Continued
                                           Annual Percentage Change
                            In Per-Share             In S&P 500
                           Book Value of           with Dividends     Relative
                              Berkshire               Included        Results
Year                             (1)                     (2)           (1)–(2)
1982                           40.0                     21.4           18.6
1983                           32.3                     22.4            9.9
1984                           13.6                      6.1            7.5
1985                           48.2                     31.6           16.6
1986                           26.1                     18.6            7.5
1987                           19.5                      5.1           14.4
1988                           20.1                     16.6            3.5
1989                           44.4                     31.7           12.7
1990                            7.4                     (3.1)          10.5
1991                           39.6                     30.5            9.1
1992                           20.3                      7.6           12.7
1993                           14.3                     10.1            4.2
1994                           13.9                      1.3           12.6
1995                           43.1                     37.6            5.5
1996                           31.8                     23.0            8.8
1997                           34.1                     33.4             .7
1998                           48.3                     28.6           19.7
1999                             .5                     21.0          (20.5)
2000                            6.5                     (9.1)          15.6
2001                           (6.2)                   (11.9)           5.7
2002                           10.0                    (22.1)          32.1
2003                           21.0                     28.7           (7.7)
       Average Annual Gain—
         1965–2003             22.2                    10.4            11.8
       Overall Gain—
         1964–2003          259,485                   4,743




6
                                   T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r   7

    On a year-by-year basis, Berkshire’s returns have at times been
volatile; changes in the stock market and thus the underlying stocks that
Berkshire owns create wide swings in per share value (see Table 1.1).
    To appreciate the volatility, compare the results for 1998 with 1999.
In 1998, Berkshire’s value increased more than 48 percent. Then, in
1999, Berkshire’s increase dropped to a paltry 0.5 percent, yet the S&P
500 increased 21 percent. Two factors were involved: Berkshire’s results
can be traced to poor return on consumer nondurables (Coca-Cola and
Gillette), while the S&P increase was fueled by the outstanding perfor-
mance of technology stocks, which Berkshire does not own.
    Speaking with the candor for which he is famous, Buffett admitted
in the 1999 annual report that “truly large superiorities over the [S&P]
index are a thing of the past.”3 He predicted, however, that over time
Berkshire’s performance would be “modestly” better than the S&P. And
for the next three years, this turned out to be the case. Then in 2003,
even though Berkshire had a terrific year—book value up 21 percent—
the S&P did even better.


B U F F E T T T O D AY

Over the most recent years, starting in the late 1990s, Buffett has been
less active in the stock market than he was in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Many people have noticed this lack of activity and have wondered
whether it signaled that the market had hit its top. Others have theo-
rized that the lack of new major purchases of common stocks simply
means that the type of stocks Buffett likes to purchase are no longer
selling at attractive prices.
     We know it is Buffett’s preference to “buy certainties at a dis-
count.” “Certainties” are defined by the predictability of a company’s
economics. The more predicable a company’s economics, the more cer-
tainty we might have about its valuation. When we look down the list
of stocks that Buffett owns as well as the wholly owned companies in-
side Berkshire, we are struck by the high degree of predictability re-
f lected there. The “discount” part of the statement obviously refers to
the stock price.
     Knowing that Buffett likes to buy highly predictable economics at
prices below the intrinsic value of the business, we can conclude that his
8    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

buyer’s strike ref lects the lack of choices in this arena. I am pretty sure
that if Coca-Cola, Gillette, or other similar businesses were today selling
at fifty cents on the dollar, Buffett would add more shares to Berkshire’s
portfolio.
     We also know Buffett’s discipline of operating only within his “cir-
cle of competence.” Think of this circle of competence as the cumulative
history of your experience. If someone had successfully operated a certain
business within a certain industry for a decade or more, we would say
that person had achieved a high level of competence for the task at hand.
However, if someone else had only a few years’ experience operating a
new business, we could reasonably question that person’s level of compe-
tence. Perhaps in Buffett’s rational mind, the sum total of his business
experience in studying and operating the businesses in Berkshire’s port-
folio sets the bar of competence so high that it would be difficult to
achieve a similar level of insight into a new industry.
     So perhaps Buffett faces a dilemma. Within his circle of compe-
tence, the types of stocks he likes to purchase are not currently selling at
discounted prices. At the same time, outside his circle of competence,
faster-growing businesses are being born in new industries that have yet
to achieve the high level of economic certainty Buffett requires. If this
analysis is correct, it explains why there have been no new large buys of
common stocks in the past few years.
     We would be foolish indeed to assume that because the menu of
stocks available for purchase has been reduced, Warren Buffett is left
without investment options. Certainly he has been active in the fixed-
income market, including taking a significant position in high-yield
bonds in 2002. He is alert for the periodic arbitrage opportunity as well,
but considering the amount of capital Buffett needs to deploy to make
meaningful returns, the arbitrage markets are perhaps not as fruitful as
they once were.
     But Berkshire Hathaway shareholders should not feel they are being
deprived of opportunities. Too often, shareholders forget one of the
most important owner-related business principles Buffett outlines each
year in the annual report. The fourth principle states, “Our preference
would be able to reach our goal [of maximizing Berkshire’s average an-
nual rate of gain in intrinsic value] by directly owning a diversified
group of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn above-
average returns on capital. Our second choice is to own parts of similar
                                   T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r   9

businesses attained primarily through the purchases of marketable com-
mon stocks.”
     In Berkshire’s early years, owning common stocks made the most
sense economically. Now, as common stock prices have risen dramati-
cally and the purchasing power of Berkshire’s retained earnings has
mushroomed, the strategy of buying whole businesses, which is Buffett’s
stated preference, has come to the forefront.
     There is a personal factor as well. We know that Buffett greatly en-
joys his relationships with his operating managers and takes a great deal
of pride in Berkshire’s collection of operating businesses. Conversely,
the angst he has endured by being a shareholder of publicly traded com-
panies, with the issues of executive compensation and questionable
capital reinvestment strategies that accompany ownership, may make
being a shareholder less appealing for Buffett today than it used to be.
If the economics are not compelling, why would Buffett choose to en-
dure the corporate governance fiascos associated with being a major
shareholder?
     The only activity Buffett involves himself in with Berkshire’s operat-
ing businesses is setting executive compensation and allocating the prof-
its. Inside Berkshire’s world, these decisions are highly rational. Outside
in the stock market, management decisions on executive compensation
and capital reallocation do not always ref lect rationality.
     What does this mean for individual investors? Because Buffett is not
actively involved in the stock market, should they automatically pull
back as well? Buffett’s alternative strategy is to buy businesses outright,
an option that is out of reach for most investors. So how should they
proceed?
     There appear to be two obvious choices. One is to make an invest-
ment in Berkshire Hathaway and so participate in the economics of
these outstanding businesses. The second choice is to take the Buffett
approach to investing, expand your circle of competence by studying
intently the business models of the companies participating in the New
Economy landscape, and march ahead.
     I believe that the fundamental principles that have so long guided
Buffett’s decisions are uncompromised, and they still carry opportuni-
ties for careful investors to outperform the S&P 500. The purpose of
this book is to present those principles in a way that thoughtful in-
vestors can understand and use.
                                    2

             The Education of
              Warren Buffett



V
      ery few people can come close to Warren Buffett’s investment
      record, and no one can top it. Through four decades of market
      ups and downs, he has continued on a steady course with un-
matched success. What he does is not f lashy, even at times very much
out of favor, and yet over and over, he has prevailed over others whose
exploits gave them temporary, f lash-in-the-pan stardom. He watches,
smiles, and continues on his way.
     How did Buffett come to his investment philosophy? Who inf lu-
enced his thinking, and how has he integrated their teachings into ac-
tion? To put the question another way, how is it that this particular
genius turned out so differently?
     Warren Buffett’s approach to investing is uniquely his own, yet it
rests on the bedrock of philosophies absorbed from four powerful fig-
ures: Benjamin Graham, Philip Fisher, John Burr Williams, and Charles
Munger. Together, they are responsible for Buffett’s financial education,
both formal and informal. The first three are educators in the classic
sense, and the last is Buffett’s partner, alter ego, and pal. All have had a
major inf luence on Buffett’s thinking; they have much to offer modern-
day investors as well.

                                                                         11
12    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

BENJAMIN GRAHAM

Graham is considered the dean of financial analysis. He was awarded
that distinction because “before him there was no [financial analysis]
profession and after him they began to call it that.”1 Graham’s two most
celebrated works are Security Analysis, coauthored with David Dodd,
and originally published in 1934; and The Intelligent Investor, origi-
nally published in 1949.
     Security Analysis appeared just a few years after the 1929 stock
market crash and in the depths of the nation’s worst depression. While
other academicians sought to explain this economic phenomenon,
Graham helped people regain their financial footing and proceed with a
profitable course of action.
     Graham began his career on Wall Street as a messenger at the bro-
kerage firm of Newburger, Henderson & Loeb, posting bond and stock
prices on a blackboard for $12 a week. From messenger, he rose to
writing research reports and soon was awarded a partnership in the
firm. By 1919, he was earning an annual salary of $600,000; he was
twenty-five years old.
     In 1926, Graham formed an investment partnership with Jerome
Newman. It was this partnership that hired Buffett some thirty years
later. Graham-Newman survived the 1929 crash, the Great Depression,
World War II, and the Korean War before it dissolved in 1956.
     From 1928 through 1956, while at Graham-Newman, Graham
taught night courses in finance at Columbia. Few people know that
Graham was financially ruined by the 1929 crash. For the second time in
his life—the first being when his father died, leaving the family finan-
cially unprotected—Graham set about rebuilding his fortune. The haven
of academia allowed him the opportunity for ref lection and reevaluation.
With the counsel of David Dodd, also a professor at Columbia, Graham
produced what became the classic treatise on conservative investing: Se-
curity Analysis. Between them, Graham and Dodd had over fifteen years
of investment experience. It took them four years to complete the book.
     The essence of Security Analysis is that a well-chosen diversified
portfolio of common stocks, based on reasonable prices, can be a sound
investment. Step by careful step, Graham helps the investor see the logic
of his approach.
                               The Education of Warren Buffett           13

     The first problem that Graham had to contend with was the lack of a
universal definition for investment that would distinguish it from specu-
lation. Considering the complexities of the issue, Graham proposed his
own definition. “An investment operation is one which, upon thorough
analysis, promises safety of principal and a satisfactory return. Operations
not meeting these requirements are speculative.”2
     What did he mean by “thorough analysis”? Just this: “the careful
study of available facts with the attempt to draw conclusions therefrom
based on established principles and sound logic.”3
     The next part of Graham’s definition is critical: A true investment
must have two qualities—some degree of safety of principal and a satis-
factory rate of return. Safety, he cautions, is not absolute; unusual or
improbable occurrences can put even a safe bond into default. Rather,
investors should look for something that would be considered safe from
loss under reasonable conditions.
     Satisfactory return—the second necessity—includes not only in-
come but also price appreciation. Graham notes that “satisfactory” is a
subjective term. Return can be any amount, however low, as long as the
investor acts with intelligence and adheres to the full definition of
investment.
     Had it not been for the bond market’s poor performance, Graham’s
definition of investing might have been overlooked. But when, between
1929 and 1932, the Dow Jones Bond Average declined from 97.70 to
65.78, bonds could no longer be mindlessly labeled pure investments.
Like stocks, not only did bonds lose considerable value but many issuers
went bankrupt. What was needed, therefore, was a process that could
distinguish the investment characteristics of both stocks and bonds from
their speculative counterparts.
     Graham reduced the concept of sound investing to a motto he
called the “margin of safety.” With this motto, he sought to unite all
securities, stocks, and bonds in a singular approach to investing.
     In essence, a margin of safety exists when securities are selling—for
whatever reason—at less than their real value. The notion of buying
undervalued securities regardless of market levels was a novel idea in the
1930s and 1940s. Graham’s goal was to outline such a strategy.
     In Graham’s view, establishing a margin-of-safety concept for bonds
was not too difficult. It wasn’t necessary, he said, to accurately determine
14    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

the company’s future income, but only to note the difference between
earnings and fixed charges. If that margin was large enough, the investor
would be protected from an unexpected decline in the company’s in-
come. If, for example, an analyst reviewed the operating history of a
company and discovered that, on average, for the past five years the com-
pany was able to earn annually five times its fixed charges, then that
company’s bonds possessed a margin of safety.
     The real test was Graham’s ability to adapt the concept for common
stocks. He reasoned that if the spread between the price of a stock and
the intrinsic value of a company was large enough, the margin-of-safety
concept could be used to select stocks.
     For this strategy to work systematically, Graham admitted, investors
needed a way to identify undervalued stocks. And that meant they
needed a technique for determining a company’s intrinsic value. Gra-
ham’s definition of intrinsic value, as it appeared in Security Analysis,
was “that value which is determined by the facts.” These facts included
a company’s assets, its earnings and dividends, and any future definite
prospects.
     Graham acknowledged that the single most important factor in de-
termining a company’s value was its future earnings power, a calculation
that is bound to be imprecise. Simply stated, a company’s intrinsic value
could be found by estimating the earnings of the company and multiply-
ing the earnings by an appropriate capitalization factor. The company’s
stability of earnings, assets, dividend policy, and financial health inf lu-
enced this capitalization factor, or multiplier.
     Graham asked us to accept that intrinsic value is an elusive concept.
It is distinct from the market’s quotation price. Originally, intrinsic
value was thought to be the same as a company’s book value, or the sum
of its real assets minus obligations. This notion led to the early belief that
intrinsic value was definite. However, analysts came to know that the
value of a company was not only its net real assets but also the value of
the earnings that these assets produced. Graham proposed that it was not
essential to determine a company’s exact intrinsic value; instead, in-
vestors should accept an approximate measure or range of value. Even an
approximate value, compared against the selling price, would be suffi-
cient to gauge margin of safety.
     There are two rules of investing, said Graham. The first rule is don’t
lose. The second rule is don’t forget rule number one. This “don’t lose”
                                The Education of Warren Buffett            15

philosophy steered Graham toward two approaches for selecting common
stocks that, when applied, adhered to the margin of safety. The first ap-
proach was buying a company for less than two-thirds of its net asset
value, and the second was focusing on stocks with low price-to-earnings
(P/E) ratios.
     Buying a stock for a price that is less than two-thirds of its net assets
fit neatly into Graham’s sense of the present and satisfied his desire for
some mathematical expectation. Graham gave no weight to a company’s
plant, property, and equipment. Furthermore, he deducted all the com-
pany’s short- and long-term liabilities. What remained would be the net
current assets. If the stock price was below this per share value, Graham
reasoned that a margin of safety existed and a purchase was warranted.
     Graham considered this to be a foolproof method of investing, but
he acknowledged that waiting for a market correction before making an
investment might be unreasonable. He set out to design a second ap-
proach to buying stocks. He focused on stocks that were down in price
and that sold at a low P/E ratio. Additionally, the company must have
some net asset value; it must owe less than its worth.
     Over the years, many other investors have searched for similar short-
cuts for determining intrinsic value. Low P/E ratios—Graham’s first
technique—was a general favorite. We have learned, however, that mak-
ing decisions on P/E ratios alone is not enough to ensure profitable
returns. Today, most investors rely on John Burr Williams’s classic defi-
nition of value, described later in this chapter: The value of any invest-
ment is the discounted present value of its future cash f low.



     The basic ideas of investing are to look at stocks as businesses,
     use market f luctuations to your advantage, and seek a margin
     of safety. That’s what Ben Graham taught us. A hundred years
     from now they will still be the cornerstones of investing.4
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1994



    Both of Graham’s approaches—buying a stock for less than two-
thirds of net asset value and buying stocks with low P/E multiples—had
a common characteristic. The stocks that Graham selected based on
16    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

these methods were deeply out of favor with the market. Some macro-
or microevent caused the market to price these stocks below their value.
Graham felt strongly that these stocks, priced “unjustifiably low,” were
attractive purchases.
    Graham’s conviction rested on certain assumptions. First, he be-
lieved that the market frequently mispriced stocks, usually because of the
human emotions of fear and greed. At the height of optimism, greed
moved stocks beyond their intrinsic value, creating an overpriced mar-
ket. At other times, fear moved prices below intrinsic value, creating an
undervalued market. His second assumption was based on the statistical
phenomenon known as “reversion to the mean,” although he did not use
that term. More eloquently, he quoted the poet Horace: “Many shall be
restored that now are fallen, and many shall fall that now are in honor.”
However stated, by statistician or poet, Graham believed that an investor
could profit from the corrective forces of an inefficient market.


PHILIP FISHER

While Graham was writing Security Analysis, Philip Fisher was begin-
ning his career as an investment counselor. After graduating from Stan-
ford’s Graduate School of Business Administration, Fisher began work as
an analyst at the Anglo London & Paris National Bank in San Francisco.
In less than two years, he was made head of the bank’s statistical depart-
ment. It was from this perch that he witnessed the 1929 stock market
crash. After a brief and unproductive career with a local brokerage
house, Fisher decided to start his own investment counseling firm. On
March 1, 1931, Fisher & Company began soliciting clients.
     Starting an investment counseling firm in the early 1930s might have
appeared foolhardy, but Fisher figured he had two advantages. First, any
investors who had any money left after the crash were probably very un-
happy with their existing broker. Second, in the midst of the Great De-
pression, businesspeople had plenty of time to sit and talk with Fisher.
     At Stanford, one of Fisher’s business classes had required him to ac-
company his professor on periodic visits to companies in the San Fran-
cisco area. The professor would get the business managers to talk about
their operations, and often helped them solve an immediate problem.
Driving back to Stanford, Fisher and his professor would recap what they
                               The Education of Warren Buffett          17

observed about the companies and managers they visited. “That hour
each week,” Fisher said, “was the most useful training I ever received.”5
     From these experiences, Fisher came to believe that people could
make superior profits by (1) investing in companies with above-average
potential and (2) aligning themselves with the most capable manage-
ment. To isolate these exceptional companies, Fisher developed a point
system that qualified a company by the characteristics of its business and
its management.
     As to the first—companies with above-average potential—the char-
acteristic that most impressed Fisher was a company’s ability to grow
sales over the years at rates greater than the industry average.6 That
growth, in turn, usually was a combination of two factors: a significant
commitment to research and development, and an effective sales organi-
zation. A company could develop outstanding products and services but
unless they were “expertly merchandised,” the research and develop-
ment effort would never translate into revenues.
     In Fisher’s view, however, market potential alone is only half the
story; the other half is consistent profits. “All the sales growth in
the world won’t produce the right type of investment vehicle if, over
the years, profits do not grow correspondingly,” he said.7 Accordingly,
Fisher examined a company’s profit margins, its dedication to main-
taining and improving those margins and, finally, its cost analysis and
accounting controls.
     No company, said Fisher, will be able to sustain its profitability un-
less it is able to break down the costs of doing business while simultane-
ously understanding the cost of each step in the manufacturing process.
To do so, he explained, a company must instill adequate accounting
controls and cost analysis. This cost information, Fisher noted, enables a
company to direct its resources to those products or services with the
highest economic potential. Furthermore, accounting controls will help
identify snags in a company’s operations. These snags, or inefficiencies,
act as an early warning device aimed at protecting the company’s over-
all profitability.
     Fisher’s sensitivity about a company’s profitability was linked with
another concern: a company’s ability to grow in the future without re-
quiring equity financing. If a company is able to grow only by selling
stocks, he said, the larger number of shares outstanding will cancel out
any benefit that stockholders might realize from the company’s growth.
                                The Education of Warren Buffett            19

he explained, is to uncover as much about a company as possible from
those individuals who are familiar with the company. Fisher admitted
this was a catchall inquiry that he called “scuttlebutt.” Today we might
call it the business grapevine. If handled properly, Fisher claimed, scut-
tlebutt could provide the investor with substantial clues to identify out-
standing investments.
     Fisher’s scuttlebutt investigation led him to interview as many
sources as possible. He talked with customers and vendors. He sought
out former employees as well as consultants who had worked for the
company. He contacted research scientists in universities, government
employees, and trade association executives. He also interviewed com-
petitors. Although executives may sometimes hesitate to disclose too
much about their own company, Fisher found that they never lack an
opinion about their competitors.
     Most investors are unwilling to commit the time and energy Fisher
felt was necessary for understanding a company. Developing a scuttle-
butt network and arranging interviews are time consuming; replicating
the scuttlebutt process for each company under consideration can be
exhausting. Fisher found a simple way to reduce his workload—he re-
duced the number of companies he owned. He always said he would
rather own a few outstanding companies than a large number of average
businesses. Generally, his portfolios included fewer than ten companies,
and often three to four companies represented 75 percent of his entire
equity portfolio.
     Fisher believed that, to be successful, investors needed to do just a few
things well. One was investing only in companies that were within their
circle of competence. Fisher himself made that mistake in the beginning.
“I began investing outside the industries which I believed I thoroughly
understood, in completely different spheres of activity; situations where I
did not have comparable background knowledge.”8


JOHN BURR WILLIAMS

John Burr Williams graduated from Harvard University in 1923 and
went on to Harvard Business School, where he got his first taste of eco-
nomic forecasting and security analysis. After Harvard, he worked as a
security analyst at two well-known Wall Street firms. He was there
20    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

through the heady days of the 1920s and the disastrous crash of 1929 and
its aftermath. That experience convinced him that to be a good investor,
one also needs to be a good economist.9
     So, in 1932 at the age of 30 and already a good investor, he enrolled
in Harvard’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. Working from a
firm belief that what happened in the economy could affect the value of
stocks, he had decided to earn an advanced degree in economics.
     When it came time to choose a topic for his doctoral dissertation,
Williams asked advice from Joseph Schumpeter, the noted Austrian
economist best known for his theory of creative destruction, who was
then a member of the economics faculty. Schumpeter suggested that
Williams look at the “intrinsic value of a common stock,” saying it
would fit Williams’s background and experience. Williams later com-
mented that perhaps Schumpeter had a more cynical motive: The
topic would keep Williams from “running afoul” of the rest of the
faculty, “none of whom would want to challenge my own ideas on in-
vestments.”10 Nonetheless, Schumpeter’s suggestion was the impetus
for Williams’s famous doctoral dissertation, which, as The Theory
of Investment Value, has inf luenced financial analysts and investors
ever since.
     Williams finished writing his dissertation in 1937. Even though he
had not yet defended it—and to the great indignation of several profes-
sors—he submitted the work to Macmillan for publication. Macmillan
declined. So did McGraw-Hill. Both decided that the book had too
many algebraic symbols. Finally, in 1938, Williams found a publisher in
Harvard University Press, but only after he agreed to pay part of the
printing cost. Two years later, Williams took his oral exam and, after
some intense arguments over the causes of the Great Depression, passed.
       The Theory of Investment Value is a genuine classic. For sixty
years, it has served as the foundation on which many famous econo-
mists—Eugene Fama, Harry Markowitz, and Franco Modigliani, to
name a few—have based their own work. Warren Buffett calls it one of
the most important investment books ever written.
     Williams’s theory, known today as the dividend discount model, or
discounted net cash-f low analysis, provides a way to put a value on a
stock or a bond. Like many important ideas, it can be reduced to a very
simple precept: To know what a security is worth today, estimate all the
                               The Education of Warren Buffett          21

cash it will earn over its lifetime and then discount that total back to a
present value. It is the underlying methodology that Warren Buffett
uses to evaluate stocks and companies.
     Buffett condensed Williams’s theory as: “The value of a business is
determined by the net cash f lows expected to occur over the life of the
business discounted at an appropriate interest rate.” Williams described
it this way: “A cow for her milk; a hen for her eggs; and a stock, by
heck, for her dividends.”11
     Williams’s model is a two-step process. First it measures cash f lows
to determine a company’s current and future worth. How to estimate
cash f lows? One quick measure is dividends paid to shareholders. For
companies that do not distribute dividends, Williams believed that in
theory all retained earnings should eventually turn into dividends.
Once a company reaches its mature stage, it would not need to reinvest
its earnings for growth so the management could start distributing the
earnings in the form of dividends. Williams wrote, “If earnings not
paid out in dividends are all successfully reinvested, then these earnings
should produce dividends later; if not, then they are money lost. In
short, a stock is worth only what you can get out of it.”12
     The second step is to discount those estimated cash f lows, to allow
for some uncertainty. We can never be exactly sure what a company will
do, how its products will sell, or what management will do or not do to
improve the business. There is always an element of risk, particularly for
stocks, even though Williams’s theory applies equally well to bonds.
     What, then, should we use as a discount rate? Williams himself is
not explicit on this point, apparently believing his readers could deter-
mine for themselves what would be appropriate. Buffett’s measuring
stick is very straightforward: He uses either the interest rate for long-
term (meaning ten-year) U.S. bonds, or when interest rates are very low,
he uses the average cumulative rate of return of the overall stock market.
     By using what amounts to a risk-free rate, Buffett has modified
Williams’s original thesis. Because he limits his purchases to those with
Ben Graham’s margin of safety, Buffett ensures that the risk is covered
in the transaction itself, and therefore he believes that using a risk-free
rate for discounting is appropriate.
     Peter Bernstein, in his book Capital Ideas, writes that Graham’s
system is a set of rules, whereas Williams’s dividend discount model is a
22    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

theory; but “both approaches end up recommending the same kinds of
stocks for purchase.”13
    Warren Buffett has used both, with stellar success.


CHARLES MUNGER

When Warren Buffett began his investment partnership in Omaha in
1956, he had just over $100,000 in capital to work with. One early task,
therefore, was to persuade additional investors to sign on. He was mak-
ing his usual careful, detailed pitch to neighbors Dr. and Mrs. Edwin
Davis, when suddenly Dr. Davis interrupted him and abruptly an-
nounced they’d give him $100,000. When Buffett asked why, Davis
replied, “Because you remind me of Charlie Munger.”14
     Charlie who?
     Even though both men grew up in Omaha and had many acquain-
tances in common, they did not actually meet until 1959. By that time,
Munger had moved to southern California, but he returned to Omaha
for a visit when his father died. Dr. Davis decided it was time the two
young men met and brought them together at a dinner in a local restau-
rant. It was the beginning of an extraordinary partnership.
     Munger, the son of a lawyer and grandson of a federal judge, had es-
tablished a successful law practice in the Los Angeles area, but his inter-
est in the stock market was already strong. At that first dinner, the two
young men found much to talk about, including securities. From then
on, they communicated often, with Buffett frequently urging Munger
to quit law and to concentrate on investing. For a while, he did both. In
1962, he formed an investment partnership much like Buffett’s, while
maintaining his law practice. Three very successful years later, he left
the law altogether, although to this day he has an office in the firm that
bears his name.
     Munger’s investment partnership in Los Angeles, and Buffett’s in
Omaha, were similar in approach; both sought to purchase some dis-
count to underlying value. (They also enjoyed similar results, both of
them outperforming the Dow Jones Industrial Average by impressive
margins.) It is not surprising, then, that they bought some of the same
stocks. Munger, like Buffett, began buying shares of Blue Chip Stamps in
the late 1960s, and eventually he became chairman of its board. When
                               The Education of Warren Buffett          23

Berkshire and Blue Chip Stamps merged in 1978, he became Berkshire’s
vice chairman, a position he still holds.
     The working relationship between Munger and Buffett was not
formalized in an official partnership agreement, but it has evolved over
the years into something perhaps even closer, more symbiotic. Even be-
fore Munger joined the Berkshire board, the two made many invest-
ment decisions together, often conferring daily; gradually their business
affairs became more and more interlinked.
     Today Munger continues as vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway
and also serves as chairman of Wesco Financial, which is 80 percent
owned by Berkshire and holds many of the same investments. In every
way, he functions as Buffett’s acknowledged comanaging partner and
alter ego. To get a sense of how closely the two are aligned, we have
only to count the number of times Buffett reports “Charlie and I” did
this, or decided that, or believe this, or looked into that, or think this—
almost as if “Charlie-and-I” were the name of one person.
     To their working relationship, Munger brought not only financial
acumen but the foundation of business law. He also brought an intel-
lectual perspective that is quite different from Buffett’s. Munger is pas-
sionately interested in many areas of knowledge—science, history,
philosophy, psychology, mathematics—and believes that each of those
fields holds important concepts that thoughtful people can, and should,
apply to all their endeavors, including investment decisions. He calls
them “the big ideas,” and they are the core of his well-known notion
of “latticework of mental models” for investors.15
     All these threads together—financial knowledge, background in
the law, and appreciation of lessons from other disciplines—produced
in Munger a somewhat different investment philosophy from that of
Buffett. Whereas Buffett was still searching for opportunities at bar-
gain prices, Munger believed in paying a fair price for quality com-
panies. He can be very persuasive.


    It’s far better to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than
    a fair company at a wonderful price.16
                                                   WARREN BUFFETT
24    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    It was Munger who convinced Buffett that paying three times
book value for See’s Candy was actually a good deal (see Chapter 4
for the full story). That was the beginning of a plate-tectonic shift in
Buffett’s thinking, and he happily acknowledges that it was Charlie
who pushed him in a new direction. Both would quickly add that
when you find a quality company that also happens to be available at a
discounted price, then you’ve struck oil—or, in Berkshire’s case, the
next best thing: Coca-Cola (see Chapter 4).
    One reason Buffett and Munger fit so well is that both men possess
an uncompromising attitude toward commonsense business principles.
Like Buffett, who endured poor returns in the insurance industry and
for a time refused to write policies, Charlie, in his function as CEO of
Wesco, refused to make loans when confronted with an unruly savings
and loan industry. Both exhibit managerial qualities necessary to run
high-quality businesses. Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholders are blessed in
having managing partners who look after their interest and help them
make money in all economic environments. With Buffett’s policy on
mandatory retirement—he does not believe in it—Berkshire’s sharehold-
ers will continue to benefit not from one mind but two long into the
future.


A BLENDING OF INFLUENCES

Shortly after Graham’s death in 1976, Buffett became the designated
steward of Graham’s value approach to investing. Indeed, Buffett’s name
became synonymous with value investing. It is easy to see why. He was
the most famous of Graham’s dedicated students, and Buffett never
missed an opportunity to acknowledge the intellectual debt he owed to
Graham. Even today, Buffett considers Graham to be the one individ-
ual, after his father, who had the most inf luence on his investment life.17
     How, then, does Buffett reconcile his intellectual indebtedness to
Graham with stock purchases like the Washington Post Company (1973)
and the Coca-Cola Company (1988)? Neither passed Graham’s strict
financial test for purchase, yet Buffett made significant investments
in both.
     As early as 1965, Buffett was becoming aware that Graham’s strategy
of buying cheap stocks was not ideal.18 Following his mentor’s approach
                               The Education of Warren Buffett          25

of searching for companies that were selling for less than their net work-
ing capital, Buffett bought some genuine losers. Several companies that
he had bought at a cheap price (hence they met Graham’s test for pur-
chase) were cheap because their underlying businesses were suffering.
     From his earliest investment mistakes, Buffett began moving away
from Graham’s strict teachings. “I evolved,” he admitted, “but I didn’t
go from ape to human or human to ape in a nice even manner.”19 He
was beginning to appreciate the qualitative nature of certain companies,
compared with the quantitative aspects of others. Despite that, however,
he still found himself searching for bargains, sometimes with horrible re-
sults. “My punishment,” he confessed, “was an education in the econom-
ics of short-line farm implementation manufacturers (Dempster Mill
Manufacturing), third-place department stores (Hochschild-Kohn), and
New England textile manufacturers (Berkshire Hathaway).”20 Buffett’s
evolution was delayed, he admitted, because what Graham taught him
was so valuable.
     When evaluating stocks, Graham did not think about the specifics of
the businesses. Nor did he ponder the capabilities of management. He
limited his research investigation to corporate filings and annual reports.
If there was a mathematical probability of making money because the
share price was less than the assets of the company, Graham purchased
the company, regardless of its business or its management. To increase
the probability of success, he purchased as many of these statistical equa-
tions as possible.
     If Graham’s teachings were limited to these precepts, Buffett would
have had little regard for him. But the margin-of-safety theory that
Graham emphasized was so important to Buffett that he could overlook
all other current weaknesses of Graham’s methodology. Even today,
Buffett continues to embrace Graham’s primary idea, the theory of
margin of safety. “Forty-two years after reading that,” Buffett noted,
“I still think those are the three right words.”21 The key lesson that
Buffett took from Graham was that successful investing involved pur-
chasing stocks when their market price was at a significant discount to
the underlying business value.
     In addition to the margin-of-safety theory, which became the
intellectual framework of Buffett’s thinking, Graham helped Buffett
appreciate the folly of following stock market f luctuations. Stocks have
an investment characteristic and a speculative characteristic, Graham
26    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

taught, and the speculative characteristics are a consequence of people’s
fear and greed. These emotions, present in most investors, cause stock
prices to gyrate far above and, more important, far below a company’s
intrinsic value, thus presenting a margin of safety. Graham taught Buf-
fett that if he could insulate himself from the emotional whirlwinds of
the stock market, he had an opportunity to exploit the irrational behav-
ior of other investors, who purchased stocks based on emotion, not logic.
     From Graham, Buffett learned how to think independently. If he
reached a logical conclusion based on sound judgment, Graham coun-
seled Buffett, he should not be dissuaded just because others disagree.
“You are neither right or wrong because the crowd disagrees with you,”
he wrote. “You are right because your data and reasoning are right.”22
     Phil Fisher in many ways was the exact opposite of Ben Graham.
Fisher believed that to make sound decisions, investors needed to become
fully informed about a business. That meant they needed to investigate
all aspects of the company. They needed to look beyond the numbers and
learn about the business itself because that information mattered a great
deal. They also needed to study the attributes of the company’s manage-
ment, for management’s abilities could affect the value of the underlying
business. They should learn as much as they could about the industry in
which the company operated, and about its competitors. Every source of
information should be exploited.



     Appearing on the PBS show Money World in 1993, Buffett
     was asked what investment advice he would give a money
     manager just starting out. “I’d tell him to do exactly what I did
     40-odd years ago, which is to learn about every company in
     the United States that has publicly traded securities.”
         Moderator Adam Smith protested, “But there’s 27,000
     public companies.”
         “Well,” said Buffett, “start with the A’s.”23


     From Fisher, Buffett learned the value of scuttlebutt. Throughout
the years, Buffett has developed an extensive network of contacts who
assist him in evaluating businesses.
                               The Education of Warren Buffett          27

    Finally, Fisher taught Buffett the benefits of focusing on just a few
investments. He believed that it was a mistake to teach investors that put-
ting their eggs in several baskets reduces risk. The danger in purchasing
too many stocks, he felt, is that it becomes impossible to watch all the
eggs in all the baskets. In his view, buying shares in a company without
taking the time to develop a thorough understanding of the business was
far more risky than having limited diversification.
    John Burr Williams provided Buffett with a methodology for cal-
culating the intrinsic value of a business, which is a cornerstone of his
investing approach.
    The differences between Graham and Fisher are apparent. Graham,
the quantitative analyst, emphasized only those factors that could be mea-
sured: fixed assets, current earnings, and dividends. His investigative re-
search was limited to corporate filings and annual reports. He spent no
time interviewing customers, competitors, or managers.
    Fisher’s approach was the antithesis of Graham. Fisher, the qualita-
tive analyst, emphasized those factors that he believed increased the value
of a company: principally, future prospects and management capability.
Whereas Graham was interested in purchasing only cheap stocks, Fisher
was interested in purchasing companies that had the potential to increase
their intrinsic value over the long term. He would go to great lengths,
including conducting extensive interviews, to uncover bits of informa-
tion that might improve his selection process.
    Although Graham’s and Fisher’s investment approach differ, notes
Buffett, they “parallel in the investment world.”24 Taking the liberty of
rephrasing, I would say that instead of paralleling, in Warren Buffett
they dovetail: His investment approach combines qualitative under-
standing of the business and its management (as taught by Fisher) and a
quantitative understanding of price and value (as taught by Graham).
    Warren Buffett once said, “I’m 15 percent Fisher and 85 percent
Benjamin Graham.”25 That remark has been widely quoted, but it is im-
portant to remember that it was made in 1969. In the intervening years,
Buffett has made a gradual but definite shift toward Fisher’s philosophy
of buying a select few good businesses and owning those businesses for
several years. My hunch is that if he were to make a similar statement
today, the balance would come pretty close to 50/50.
    Without question, it was Charlie Munger who was most responsi-
ble for moving Buffett toward Fisher’s thinking.
28    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     In a real sense, Munger is the active embodiment of Fisher’s quali-
tative theories. From the start, Charlie had a keen appreciation of the
value of a better business, and the wisdom of paying a reasonable price
for it. Through their years together, Charlie has continued to preach
the wisdom of paying up for a good business.
     In one important respect, however, Munger is also the present-day
echo of Ben Graham. Years earlier, Graham had taught Buffett the two-
fold significance of emotion in investing—the mistakes it triggers for
those who base irrational decisions on it, and the opportunities it thus
creates for those who can avoid falling into the same traps. Munger,
through his readings in psychology, has continued to develop that theme.
He calls it the “psychology of misjudgment,” a notion we look at more
fully in Chapter 11; and through persistent emphasis, he keeps it an inte-
gral part of Berkshire’s decision making. It is one of his most important
contributions.

                                       
Buffett’s dedication to Ben Graham, Phil Fisher, John Burr Williams,
and Charlie Munger is understandable. Graham gave Buffett the intel-
lectual basis for investing, the margin of safety, and helped Buffett learn
how to master his emotions to take advantage of market f luctuations.
Fisher gave Buffett an updated, workable methodology that enabled him
to identify good long-term investments and manage a portfolio over the
long term, and taught the value of focusing on just a few good com-
panies. Williams gave him a mathematical model for calculating true
value. Munger helped Buffett appreciate the economic returns that come
from buying and owning great businesses. The frequent confusion sur-
rounding Buffett’s investment actions is easily understood when we ac-
knowledge that Buffett is the synthesis of all four men.
    “It is not enough to have good intelligence,” Descartes wrote; “the
principal thing is to apply it well.” It is the application that separates
Buffett from other investment managers. Many of his peers are highly
intelligent, disciplined, and dedicated. Buffett stands above them all be-
cause of his formidable ability to integrate the strategies of the four
wise men into a single cohesive approach.
                                   3

         “Our Main Business
           Is Insurance”
                   The Early Days of
                  Berkshire Hathaway



W
         hen the Buffett Partnership took control of Berkshire Hathaway
         in 1965, stockholders’ equity had dropped by half and loss from
         operations exceeded $10 million. Buffett and Ken Chace, who
managed the textile group, labored intensely to turn the textile mills
around. Results were disappointing; returns on equity struggled to reach
double digits.
     Amid the gloom, there was one bright spot, a sign of things to
come: Buffett’s deft handling of the company’s common stock portfo-
lio. When Buffett took over, the corporation had $2.9 million in mar-
ketable securities. By the end of the first year, Buffett had enlarged the
securities account to $5.4 million. In 1967, the dollar return from in-
vesting was three times the return of the entire textile division, which
had ten times the equity base.
     Nonetheless, over the next decade Buffett had to come to grips
with certain realities. First, the very nature of the textile business
made high returns on equity improbable. Textiles are commodities

                                                                       29
30    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

and commodities by definition have a difficult time differentiating
their products from those of competitors. Foreign competition, which
employed a cheaper labor force, was squeezing profit margins. Second,
to stay competitive, the textile mills would require significant capital
improvements—a prospect that is frightening in an inf lationary envi-
ronment and disastrous if the business returns are anemic.
     Buffett made no attempt to hide the difficulties, but on several
occasions he explained his thinking: The textile mills were the largest
employer in the area; the work force was an older age group with rela-
tively nontransferable skills; management had shown a high degree of
enthusiasm; the unions were being reasonable; and lastly, he believed
that the textile business could attain some profits.
     However, Buffett made it clear that he expected the textile group
to earn positive returns on modest capital expenditures. “I won’t close
down a business of subnormal profitability merely to add a fraction of a
point to our corporate returns,” said Buffett. “I also feel it inappropri-
ate for even an exceptionally profitable company to fund an operation
once it appears to have unending losses in prospect. Adam Smith would
disagree with my first proposition and Karl Marx would disagree with
my second; the middle ground,” he explained “is the only position that
leaves me comfortable.”1
     In 1980, the annual report revealed ominous clues for the future
of the textile group. That year, the group lost its prestigious lead-off
position in the Chairman’s Letter. By the next year, textiles were not
discussed in the letter at all. Then, the inevitable: In July 1985, Buffett
closed the books on the textile group, thus ending a business that had
started some one hundred years earlier.
     The experience was not a complete failure. First, Buffett learned a
valuable lesson about corporate turnarounds: They seldom succeed. Sec-
ond, the textile group generated enough capital in the earlier years to
buy an insurance company and that is a much brighter story.


THE INSURANCE BUSINESS

In March 1967, Berkshire Hathaway purchased, for $8.6 million, the
outstanding stock of two insurance companies headquartered in Omaha:
                              “Our Main Business Is Insurance”          31

National Indemnity Company and National Fire & Marine Insurance
Company. It was the beginning of a phenomenal success story. Berkshire
Hathaway the textile company would not long survive, but Berkshire
Hathaway the investment company that encompassed it was about to
take off.
     To appreciate the phenomenon, we must recognize the true value of
owning an insurance company. Sometimes insurance companies are good
investments, sometimes not. They are, however, always terrific invest-
ment vehicles. Policyholders, by paying their premiums, provide a con-
stant stream of cash, known as the f loat. Insurance companies set aside
some of this cash (called the reserve) to pay claims each year, based on
their best estimates, and invest the rest. To give themselves a high degree
of liquidity, since it is seldom possible to know exactly when claim pay-
ments will need to be paid, most opt to invest in marketable securities—
primarily stocks and bonds. Thus Warren Buffett had acquired not only
two modestly healthy companies, but a cast-iron vehicle for managing
investments.
     For a seasoned stock picker like Buffett, it was a perfect match. In
just two years, he increased the combined stocks and bonds portfolio of
the two companies from $31.9 million to nearly $42 million. At the
same time, the insurance businesses themselves were doing quite well.
In just one year, the net income of National Indemnity rose from $1.6
million to $2.2 million.
     Buffett’s early success in insurance led him to expand aggressively
into this group. Over the next decade, he purchased three additional
insurance companies and organized five more. And he has not slowed
down. As of 2004, Berkshire owns 38 insurance companies, including
two giants, the Government Employees Insurance Company (GEICO)
and General Re, each of which has several subsidiaries.

Government Employees Insurance Company
Warren Buffett first became acquainted with GEICO while a student
at Columbia because his mentor, Ben Graham, was a chairman of
its board of directors. A favorite part of the Buffett lore is the now-
familiar story of the young student visiting the company’s offices on a
Saturday morning and pounding on the door until a janitor let him in.
32    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett then spent five hours getting an education in the insurance
business from the only person working that day: Lorimer Davidson, an
investment officer who eventually became the company’s CEO. What
he learned intrigued him.
     GEICO had been founded on a couple of simple but fairly revolu-
tionary concepts: If you insure only people with good driving records,
you’ll have fewer claims; and if you sell direct to customers, without
agents, you keep overhead costs down.
     Back home in Omaha and working for his father’s brokerage firm, a
very young Warren Buffett wrote a report of GEICO for a financial
journal in which he noted, in what may be the understatement of that
decade, “There is reason to believe the major portion of growth lies
ahead.”2 Buffett put $10,282 in the company, then sold it the next year at
50 percent profit. But he always kept track of the company.
     Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, GEICO prospered. But then it
began to stumble. For several years, the company had tried to expand its
customer base by underpricing and relaxing its eligibility requirements,
and two years in a row it seriously miscalculated the amount needed
for reserves (out of which claims are paid). The combined effect of these
mistakes was that, by the mid-1970s, the once-bright company was near
bankruptcy.
     When the stock price dropped from $61 to $2 a share in 1976,
Warren Buffett started buying. Over a period of five years, with an un-
shakable belief that it was a strong company with its basic competitive
advantages unchanged, he invested $45.7 million in GEICO.
     The very next year, 1977, the company was profitable again. Over
the next two decades, GEICO had positive underwriting ratios—mean-
ing that it took in more in premiums than it paid out in claims—in every
year but one. In the industry, where negative ratios are the rule rather
than the exception, that kind of record is almost unheard of. And that
excess f loat gives GEICO tremendous resources for investments, bril-
liantly managed by a remarkable man named Lou Simpson.
     By 1991, Berkshire owned nearly half (48 percent) of GEICO. The
insurance company’s impressive performance, and Buffett’s interest in
the company, continued to climb. In 1994, serious discussions began
about Berkshire’s buying the entire company, and a year later the final
deal was announced. At that point, Berkshire owned 51 percent of
GEICO, and agreed to purchase the rest for $2.3 billion. This at a time
                              “Our Main Business Is Insurance”           33

when most of the insurance industry struggled with profitability and
most investors stayed away in droves. By the time all the paperwork was
done, it was early 1996. At that point, GEICO officially became a
wholly owned unit of Berkshire Hathaway, managed independently
from Berkshire’s other insurance holdings.
     Despite a rough spot or two, Buffett’s trust in the basic concept of
GEICO has been handsomely rewarded. From 1996 to 2003, the
company increased its share of market from 2.7 to 5 percent. The
biggest rough spot was the year 2000, when many policyholders
switched to other insurers, and a very large, very expensive advertis-
ing campaign ($260 million) failed to produce as much new business
as projected.
     Things began to stabilize in 2001, and by 2002, GEICO was solidly
back on track, with substantial growth in market share and in profits.
That year, GEICO took in $6.9 billion in premiums, a huge jump from
the $2.9 billion booked in 1996, the year Berkshire took full ownership.
In April 2003, the company hit a major milestone when it added its
five-millionth policyholder. By year-end 2003, those five million policy-
holders had sent in premiums totaling $8.1 billion.
     Because its profit margins increase the longer policyholders stay with
the company, GEICO focuses on building long-term relationships with
customers. When Buffett took over the company in 1996, he put in a
new incentive system that rewards this focus. Half the bonuses and profit
sharing are based on policies that are at least one year old, the other half
on policyholder growth.
     The average GEICO customer has more than one vehicle insured,
pays premiums of approximately $1,100 year after year, but maintains
an excellent driving record. As Buffett once pointed out, the economics
of that formula are simple: “Cash is pouring in rather than going out.”3
     From the early bargain days of $2 a share in 1976, Buffett paid
close to $70 a share for the rest of the company in 1996. He makes no
apologies. He considers GEICO a unique company with unlimited po-
tential, something worth paying a hefty price for. In this perspective—
if you want the very best companies, you have to be willing to pay up
when they become available—Buffett’s partner, Charlie Munger, has
been a profound inf luence.
     Knowing their close working relationship, it’s a fair bet that Munger
had a lot to say about Berkshire’s other big insurance decision.
34    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY


General Re Corporation
In 1996 Buffett paid $2.3 billion to buy the half of GEICO he didn’t al-
ready own. Two years later, he paid seven times that amount—about $16
billion in Berkshire Hathaway stock—to acquire a reinsurance company
called General Re.4 It was his biggest acquisition by far; some have called
it the single biggest event in Berkshire history.5
     Reinsurance is a sector of the insurance industry not well known to
the general public, for it doesn’t deal in the familiar products of life,
homeowner’s, or auto insurance. In simplest terms, reinsurers insure
other insurance companies. Through a contract that spells out how the
premiums and the losses are to be apportioned, a reinsurer takes on some
percentage of the original company’s risk. This allows the primary in-
surer to assume a higher level of risk, reduces its needs for operating cap-
ital, and moderates loss ratios.
     For its part, the reinsurer receives a share of premiums earned, to in-
vest as it sees fit. At General Re, that investment had been primarily in
bonds. This, in fact, was a key part of Buffett’s strategy in buying the
company.
     When Buffett acquired it, General Re owned approximately $19
billion in bonds, $5 billion in stocks, and $15 billion in f loat. By using
Berkshire stock to buy the company and its heavy bond portfolio, Buf-
fett in one neat step shifted the balance of Berkshire’s overall holdings
from 80 percent stocks to 60 percent. When the IRS ruled late in 1998
that the merger involved no capital gains, that meant he had managed to
“sell” almost 20 percent of Berkshire’s equity holdings, thus deftly side-
stepping the worst of price volatility, essentially tax free.
     The only significant staff change that followed the merger was the
elimination of General Re’s investment unit. Some 150 people had been
in charge of deciding where to invest the company’s funds; they were re-
placed with just one individual—Warren Buffett.
     Just after Berkshire bought General Re, the company had one of
its worst years. In 1999, GenRe, as it is known, paid claims resulting
from natural disasters (a major hailstorm in Australia, earthquakes in
Turkey, and a devastating series of storms in Europe), from the largest
house fire in history, and from high-profile movie f lops (the company
had insured box-office receipts). To make matters worse, GenRe was
part of a grouping of several insurers and reinsurers that became ensnarled
in a workers’ compensation tangle that ended in multiple litigation and a
                               “Our Main Business Is Insurance”            35

loss exposure of approximately $275 million for two years running
(1998 and 1999).
     The problem, it later became apparent, was that GenRe was under-
pricing its product. Premiums coming in, remember, will ultimately be
paid to policyholders who have claims. When more is paid out than
comes in, the result is an underwriting loss. The ratio of that loss to the
premiums received in any given year is known as the cost of f loat for that
year. When the two parts of the formula are even, the cost of f loat is
zero—which is a good thing. Even better is less than zero, or negative
f loat cost, which is what happens when premiums outstrip loss payments,
producing an underwriting profit. This is referred to as negative cost of
f loat, but it is actually a positive: The insurer is literally being paid to
hold the capital.
     Float is a wonderful thing, Buffett has often commented, unless it
comes at too high a cost. Premiums that are too low or losses that are un-
expectedly high adversely affect the cost of f loat; when both occur si-
multaneously, the cost of f loat skyrockets.
     And that is just what happened with GenRe, although it wasn’t
completely obvious at first. Buffett had realized as early as 1999 that
the policies were underpriced, and he began working to correct it. The
effects of such changes are not felt overnight, however, and in 2000,
General Re experienced an underwriting loss of $1.6 billion, produc-
ing a f loat cost of 6 percent. Still, Buffett felt able to report in his 2000
letter to shareholders that the situation was improving and he expected
the upward trend to continue. Then, in a moment of terrible, uninten-
tional foreshadowing, he added, “Absent a mega-catastrophe, we expect
our f loat cost to fall in 2001.”6 Some six months later, on September
11, the nation had an enormous hole torn in its soul by a mega-
catastrophe we had never imagined possible.
     In a letter to shareholders that was sent out with the third quarter
2001 report, Buffett wrote, “A mega-catastrophe is no surprise. One
will occur from time to time, and this will not be our last. We did
not, however, price for manmade mega-cats, and we were foolish in
not doing so.”7
     Buffett estimated that Berkshire’s underwriting losses from the ter-
rorist attacks on September 11 totaled $2.275 billion, of which $1.7 bil-
lion fell to General Re. That level of loss galvanized a change at GenRe.
More aggressive steps were taken to make sure the policies were priced
correctly, and that sufficient reserves were in place to pay claims. These
36    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

corrective maneuvers were successful. In 2002, after five years of losses,
GenRe reported its first underwriting profit, prompting Buffett to an-
nounce at the 2002 annual meeting, “We’re back.”

                                       
Warren Buffett, as is well known, takes the long view. He is the first
to admit, with his trademark candor, that he had not seen the prob-
lems at GenRe. That in itself is interesting, and oddly ironic, to Buf-
fett’s observers. That such an experienced hand as Buffett could miss
the problems demonstrates the complexity of the insurance industry.
Had those problems been apparent, I have no doubt Buffett would not
have paid the price he did for GenRe. I’m also reasonably certain he
would have proceeded, however, because his line of sight goes to the
long term.
    The reinsurance industry offers huge potential, and a well-run
reinsurance business can create enormous value for shareholders. Buffett
knows that better than most. So, even though GenRe’s pricing errors
created problems in the short run, and even though he bought those
problems along with the company, this does not negate his basic con-
clusion that a well-managed reinsurance company could create great
value for Berkshire. In a situation such as this, Buffett’s instinct is to fix
the problems, not unload the company.
    As he usually does, Buffett credits the company’s managers with
restoring underwriting discipline by setting rational prices for the poli-
cies and setting up sufficient reserves. Under their leadership, he wrote
in the 2003 letter to shareholders, General Re “will be a powerful en-
gine driving Berkshire’s future profitability.”8
    At this writing, General Re is one of only two major global rein-
surers with a AAA rating. The other is also a Berkshire company: the
National Indemnity reinsurance operation.

Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group
The National Indemnity insurance operation inside Berkshire today is a
far cry from the company that Buffett purchased in 1967. Different,
that is, in operation and scope, but not in underlying philosophy.
    One aspect of National Indemnity that did not exist under its
founder, Jack Ringwalt, is the reinsurance division. Today, this division,
                              “Our Main Business Is Insurance”          37

run from National Indemnity’s office in Stamford, Connecticut, con-
tributes powerfully to Berkshire’s revenues.
     The reinsurance group is headed by Ajit Jain, born in India and ed-
ucated at the Indian Institute of Technology and at Harvard. He re-
cently joked that when he joined Berkshire in 1982, he didn’t even
know how to spell reinsurance, yet Jain has built a tremendously prof-
itable operation that earns Buffett’s highest praise year in and year out.9
     Working on the foundation of Berkshire’s financial strength, the
reinsurance group is able to write policies that other companies, even
other reinsurers, would shy away from. Some of them stand out because
they are so unusual: a policy insuring against injury to superstar short-
stop Alex Rodrigez for the Texas Rangers baseball team, or against a $1
billion payout by an Internet lottery. Commenting on the latter, a vice
president in the reinsurance division noted, “As long as the premium is
higher than the odds, we’re comfortable.”10
     The bulk of underwriting at the reinsurance group is not quite so
f lashy. It is, however, extremely profitable. Significant revenue in-
creases occurred in 2002 and 2003. In the aftermath of September 11,
many companies and individuals increased their insurance coverage,
often significantly, yet there were no catastrophic losses in the two
following years. In 2003, the Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group
brought in $4.43 billion in premiums, bringing its total f loat to just
under $14 billion.
     Perhaps more significant, its cost of f loat that year was a negative
3 percent—meaning there was no cost, but rather a profit. (In this
case, remember, “negative” is a positive.) That is because the reinsur-
ance group in 2003 had an underwriting gain (more premiums than
payouts) of more than $1 billion. For comparison, that same year the
GEICO underwriting gain was $452 million, and General Re’s was
$145 million.
     It is no wonder Buffett says of Jain, “If you see Ajit at our annual
meeting, bow deeply.”11

                                   
Warren Buffett understands the insurance business in a way that few
others do. His success derives in large part from acknowledging the es-
sential commodity nature of the industry and elevating his insurance
companies to the level of a franchise.
38    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    Insurance companies sell a product that is indistinguishable from
those of competitors. Policies are standardized and can be copied by any-
one. There are no trademarks, no patents, no advantages in location or
raw materials. It is easy to get licensed and insurance rates are an open
book. Insurance, in other words, is a commodity product.
    In a commodity business, a common way to gain market share is to
cut prices. In periods of intense competition, other companies were will-
ing to sell insurance policies below the cost of doing business rather than
risk losing market share. Buffett held firm: Berkshire’s insurance opera-
tions would not move into unprofitable territory. Only once—at General
Re—did this happen, and it caught Buffett unaware.




     You can always write dumb insurance policies. There is an un-
     limited market for dumb insurance policies. And they’re very
     troubling because the first day the premium comes in, that’s the
     last time you see any new money. From then on, it’s all going
     out. And that’s not our aim in life.12
                                              WARREN BUFFETT, 2001




     Unwilling to compete on price, Buffett instead seeks to distinguish
Berkshire’s insurance companies in two other ways. First, by financial
strength. Today, in annual revenue and profit, Berkshire’s insurance
group ranks second, only to AIG, in the property casualty industry. Ad-
ditionally, the ratio of Berkshire’s investment portfolio ($35.2 billion) to
its premium volume ($8.1 billion) is significantly higher than the indus-
try average.
     The second method of differentiation involves Buffett’s underwrit-
ing philosophy. His goal is simple: to always write large volumes of
insurance but only at prices that make sense. If prices are low, he is con-
tent to do very little business. This philosophy was instilled at National
Indemnity by its founder, Jack Ringwalt. Since that time, says Buffett,
Berkshire has never knowingly wavered from this underwriting disci-
pline. The only exception is General Re, and its underpricing had a
                              “Our Main Business Is Insurance”          39

large impact on Berkshire’s overall performance for several years. Today,
that unpleasant state of affairs has been rectified.
    Berkshire’s superior financial strength has distinguished its insurance
operations from the rest of the industry. When competitors vanish from
the marketplace because they are frightened by recent losses, Berkshire
stands by as a constant supplier of insurance. In a word, the financial in-
tegrity that Buffett has imposed on Berkshire’s insurance companies has
created a franchise in what is otherwise a commodity business. It’s not
surprising that Buffett notes, in his typical straightforward way, “Our
main business is insurance.”13
    The stream of cash generated by Berkshire’s insurance operations is
mind-boggling: some $44.2 billion in 2003. What Buffett does with that
cash defines him and his company. And that takes us to our next chapter.
                                    4

            Buying a Business


B
      erkshire Hathaway, Inc., is complex but not complicated. It owns
      (at the moment) just shy of 100 separate businesses—the insurance
      companies described in the previous chapter, and a wide variety
of noninsurance businesses acquired through the income stream from
the insurance operation. Using that same cash stream, it also purchases
bonds and stocks of publicly traded companies. Running through it all is
Warren Buffett’s down-to-earth way of looking at a business: whether
it’s one he’s considering buying in its entirety or one he’s evaluating for
stock purchase.
     There is no fundamental difference, Buffett believes, between the
two. Both make him an owner of the business, and therefore both deci-
sions should, in his view, spring from this owner’s point of view. This is
the single most important thing to understand about Buffett’s investment
approach: Buying stocks means buying a business and requires the same
discipline. In fact, it has always been Buffett’s preference to directly own
a company, for it permits him to inf luence what he considers the most
critical issue in a business: capital allocation. But when stocks represent a
better value, his choice is to own a portion of a company by purchasing
its common stock.
     In either case, Buffett follows the same strategy: He looks for com-
panies he understands, with consistent earnings history and favorable
long-term prospects, showing good return on equity with little debt,
that are operated by honest and competent people, and, importantly, are

                                                                          41
42    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

available at attractive prices. This owner-oriented way of looking at po-
tential investments is bedrock to Buffett’s approach.



     All we want is to be in businesses that we understand, run by
     people whom we like, and priced attractively relative to their
     future prospects.1
                                             WARREN BUFFETT, 1994



    Because he operates from this owner’s perspective, wherein buying
stock is the same as buying companies, it is also true that buying com-
panies is the same as buying stock. The same principles apply in both
cases, and therefore both hold important lessons for us.
    Those principles are described in some detail in Chapters 5 through
8. Collectively, they make up what I have called the “Warren Buffett
Way,” and they are applied, almost subconsciously, every time he consid-
ers buying shares of a company, or acquiring the entire company. In this
chapter, we take a brief background tour of some of these purchases, so
that we may better understand the lessons they offer.


A MOSAIC OF MANY BUSINESSES

Berkshire Hathaway, Inc., as it exists today, is best understood as a
holding company. In addition to the insurance companies, it also owns
a newspaper, a candy company, an ice cream/hamburger chain, an en-
cyclopedia publisher, several furniture stores, a maker of Western boots,
jewelry stores, a supplier of custom picture framing material, a paint
company, a company that manufactures and distributes uniforms, a vac-
uum cleaner business, a public utility, a couple of shoe companies, and
a household name in underwear—among others.
    Some of these companies, particularly the more recent acquisitions,
are jewels that Buffett found in a typically Buffett-like way: He adver-
tised for them in the Berkshire Hathaway annual reports.
    His criteria are straightforward: a simple, understandable business
with consistent earning power, good return on equity, little debt, and
                                                Buying a Business        43

good management in place. He is interested in companies in the $5 bil-
lion to $20 billion range, the larger the better. He is not interested in
turnarounds, hostile takeovers, or tentative situations where no asking
price has been determined. He promises complete confidentiality and a
quick response.
     In Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports and in remarks to share-
holders, he has often described his acquisition strategy this way: “It’s
very scientific. Charlie and I just sit around and wait for the phone to
ring. Sometimes it’s a wrong number.”1
     The strategy works. Through this public announcement, and also
through referrals from managers of current Berkshire companies, Buf-
fett has acquired an amazing string of successful businesses. Some of
them have been Berkshire companies for decades, and their stories have
become part of the Buffett lore.
     See’s Candy Shops, for example, has been a Berkshire subsidiary
since 1972. It is noteworthy because it represents the first time Buffett
moved away from Ben Graham’s dictum to buy only undervalued com-
panies. The net purchase price—$30 million—was three times book
value. Without doubt, it was a good decision. In 2003 alone, See’s pre-
tax earnings were $59 million—almost exactly twice the original pur-
chase price.
     At Berkshire’s annual meeting in 1997, 25 years after the See’s pur-
chase, Charlie Munger recalled, “It was the first time we paid for qual-
ity.” To which Buffett added, “If we hadn’t bought See’s, we wouldn’t
have bought Coke.”3 Later on in this chapter, the full significance of that
comment becomes apparent.
     Another company well known to Berkshire followers is Nebraska
Furniture Mart. This enormous retail operation began in Omaha,
Buffett’s hometown, in 1937 when a Russian immigrant named Rose
Blumkin, who had been selling furniture from her basement, put up
$500 to open a small store. In 1983, Buffett paid Mrs. B, as she was
universally known, $55 million for 80 percent of her store.
     Today the Nebraska Furniture Mart, which comprises three retail
units totaling 1.2 million square feet on one large piece of real estate,
sells more home furnishings than any other store in the country. Run-
ning a close second is the second Mart, opened in 2002 in Kansas City. In
his 2003 letter to shareholders, Buffett linked the success of this 450,000-
square-foot operation to the legendary Mrs. B., who was still at work
44     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

until the year she died at the age of 104. “One piece of wisdom she im-
parted,” Buffett wrote, “was ‘if you have the lowest price, customers will
find you at the bottom of a river.’ Our store serving greater Kansas City,
which is located in one of the area’s more sparsely populated parts, has
proved Mrs. B’s point. Though we have more than 25 acres of parking,
the lot has at times overf lowed.”4
    In January 1986, Buffett paid $315 million in cash for the Scott &
Fetzer Company, a conglomerate of twenty-one separate companies, in-
cluding the makers of Kirby vacuum cleaners and World Book encyclo-
pedia. It was one of Berkshire’s largest business acquisitions up to that
point, and has since exceeded Buffett’s own optimistic expectations. It is
a model of an organization that creates a large return on equity with
very little debt—and that is one of Buffett’s favorite traits. In fact, he
calculates that Scott Fetzer’s return on equity would easily place it
among the top 1 percent of the Fortune 500.
    Scott Fetzer’s various companies make a range of rather specialized
(some would say boring) industrial products, but what they really make
is money for Berkshire Hathaway. Since Buffett bought it, Scott Fetzer
has distributed over 100 percent of its earnings back to Berkshire while
simultaneously increasing its own earnings.
    In recent years, Warren Buffett has turned more and more of his at-
tention to buying companies instead of shares. The story of how Buffett
came to acquire these diverse businesses is interesting in itself. Perhaps
more to the point, the stories collectively give us valuable insight into
Buffett’s way of looking at companies. In this chapter, we have space
for an abbreviated visit to just three of these acquisitions, but that is by
no means all. To illustrate the wide range of industries within Berk-
shire, here are a few examples of recent acquisitions:

     • Fruit of the Loom, which produces one-third of the men’s and
       boys’ underwear sold in the United States. Purchased in 2002 for
       $835 million, which, after accounting for the earned interest on
       assumed debt, was a net of $730 million.
     • Garan, which makes children’s clothing, including the popular
       Garanimals line. Purchased in 2002 for $270 million.
     • MiTek, which produces structural hardware for the building in-
       dustry. Purchased in 2001 for $400 million. An interesting as-
       pect of this deal is that Berkshire now owns only 90 percent of
                                                 Buying a Business        45

        the company. The other 10 percent is owned by 55 managers
        who love their company and wanted to be part owners; this en-
        trepreneurial spirit among management is one of the qualities
        Buffett looks for.
    •   Larson-Juhl, the leading supplier of framing materials to custom
        framing shops. Purchased in 2001 for $225 million.
    •   CORT Business Services, which leases quality furniture to offices
        and corporate-owned apartments. Purchased in 2000 for $467
        million, including $83 million of debt.
    •   Ben Bridge Jeweler, a West Coast chain owned and operated by
        the same family for four generations. A requirement of the pur-
        chase was that the Bridge family remain to manage the company.
        Purchased in 2000 for a price not disclosed publicly.
    •   Justin Industries, which makes Western boots ( Justin, Tony Lama,
        and other brands) and, under the Acme brand name, bricks. Pur-
        chased in 2000 for $600 million.
    •   Benjamin Moore, which has been making paint for 121 years.
        Purchased in 2000 for $1 billion.
    •   Shaw Industries, the largest manufacturer of carpeting in the
        world. Purchased 87 percent of the company in 2000 and the re-
        mainder in early 2002, for a total of $2 billion. Currently, Shaw is,
        except for insurance, Berkshire’s largest business, with 2003 earn-
        ings of $436 million.


C L AY T O N H O M E S

In 1966, James Clayton, the son of a Tennessee sharecropper, started a
mobile home business with $25,000 of borrowed money. Within four
years, Clayton Homes was selling 700 units annually. Clayton is now
one of the largest makers of manufactured homes in the United States,
with about $1.2 billion in sales in 2003. Home models range from
modest (500 square feet, priced at $10,000) to luxury ($100,000 for
1,500 square feet, with hardwood f loors, stainless steel appliances, and
island kitchens).
     Clayton has about 976 retailers in the United States, including 302
company-owned stores, 86 company-owned community sales offices,
and 588 manufactured housing communities in 33 states. It also owns
46    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

and operates financing, loan-servicing, and insurance subsidiaries. The
company went public in 1983, and Berkshire Hathaway acquired it in
August 2003 for $1.7 billion.
    James Clayton gained his experience and education the hard way.
Determined to pull himself out of the backbreaking work his parents
endured (his father picked cotton and his mother worked in a shirt
factory), Clayton financed his education at the University of Tennessee
by playing guitar on the radio. He eventually became a part-time host
on Startime, a weekly variety program on Knoxville TV and sang
along with people like Dolly Parton. Then, while in college, he started
a used car business with his fraternity brothers but the business went
bankrupt in 1961 when the bank called his loan. “My parents thought
for sure that we were going to jail and I made a pact with myself that I
haven’t violated: I was never going to be vulnerable to a bank again.”5
    The acquisition of Clayton Homes is a typical Buffett story—
meaning that it is atypical compared with the rest of the business world.
    The first aspect of the story is that Buffett had some hands-on ex-
perience with the industry. In 2002, Berkshire had purchased junk
bonds from Oakwood Homes, another mobile home manufacturer. As
Buffett has freely admitted, at the time he was not fully aware of the
“atrocious consumer financing practices” that were common in the
industry. “But I learned,” he added. “Oakwood rather promptly went
bankrupt.”6
    Fast forward to February 2003. Al Auxier, a professor of finance at
the University of Tennessee, brought a group of MBA students to
Omaha to meet with Buffett for what Buffett describes as “two hours of
give-and-take.” It was the fifth time Auxier had made the trip, and it had
become traditional for the visiting students to bring a thank-you gift for
Buffett. This time, the gift was the autobiography of James Clayton, who
had located his company in Knoxville, home of his alma mater.
    After he finished reading the book, Buffett phoned James Clayton’s
son Kevin, who is now CEO. “As I talked with Kevin, it became clear
that he was both able and a straight-shooter. Soon thereafter, I made an
offer for the business based solely on Jim’s book, my evaluation of
Kevin, the public financials of Clayton and what I had learned from the
Oakwood experience.”7 Two weeks later, Berkshire announced its ac-
quisition of Clayton Homes. “I made the deal over the phone,” Buffett
said, “without ever seeing it.”8
                                               Buying a Business       47

    In the fall of 2003, Buffett was invited to attend the University of
Tennessee’s MBA Symposium. He recounted the Clayton story, and
then presented all the students who had started the ball rolling with
honorary PhDs (for Phenomenal, hard-working Dealmaker) from the
University of Berkshire Hathaway. Each student was also given one class
B share of Berkshire, and their teacher, Al Auxier, was presented with an
A share.


M C L A N E C O M PA N Y

In 1894, Robert McLane, escaping the post-Civil War poverty of South
Carolina, moved to Cameron, Texas, and started a small grocery store.
Over the years, he developed it into a wholesale grocery and distribution
business. His son, Robert D. McLane, known by his middle name of
Drayton, joined the company in 1921. Drayton’s son, Drayton Jr., began
working in the family business at the age of nine, and spent many teenage
Saturdays sweeping f loors in the warehouse. After college, he joined the
company full time.
     Eventually Drayton Jr. convinced his father to move the company
close to an interstate highway and then in 1962 to automate the business
with computers. In 1990, he sold the company to his tennis pal Sam Wal-
ton, and McLane became a Wal-Mart subsidiary, supplying Wal-Mart
and Sam’s Club stores, as well as convenience stores and fast-food restau-
rants across the nation with everything from peanuts to pepperoni.
     By 2003, McLane had become the largest distributor in the United
States to corner and convenience stores. McLane’s innovative software
systems for pricing, freight, delivery, and point-of-sales processing and
its excellent delivery service had made the company a lean and efficient
full-service delivery company.
     An efficient, well-run company built on strong principles and show-
ing consistent profitability is just what Warren Buffett likes to see. In
May 2003, Berkshire announced it had acquired McLane for $1.45 bil-
lion in cash, and assumed an additional $1.2 billion in liabilities.
     The acquisition positioned McLane for even greater growth, as it
freed the company to pursue distribution contracts with supermarket
chains and with Wal-Mart competitors, such as Target and Dollar Gen-
eral. “In the past some retailers had shunned McLane,” wrote Buffett in
48    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

his 2003 shareholder letter, “because it was owned by their major com-
petitor. But Grady Rosier, McLane’s superb CEO, has already landed
some of these accounts—he was in full stride the day the deal closed—
and more will come.”9


T H E PA M P E R E D C H E F

In 1980, Doris Christopher, a former teacher of home economics and a
stay-at-home mom, was looking for part-time work with f lexible hours
that would add to the family income but still allow her time with her
two young daughters. She decided to leverage what she knew—cooking
and teaching—and that led her to the idea of selling kitchenware with in-
home demonstrations. So she borrowed $3,000 against her life insurance
policy, went shopping at the wholesale mart and bought $175 worth of
products she admired, then asked a friend to host a demonstration party.
     Christopher was a nervous wreck before the first party, but it was
a resounding success. Not only did everyone have a great time, several
guests suggested they’d like to host a party themselves. That was the
beginning of the Pampered Chef, a company that markets gourmet
kitchenware through direct sales and in-home parties.
     The 34-year-old Christopher, who had no business background,
started the company in the basement of her Chicago home with the
$3,000 loan. The first year, working with her husband, she had sales of
$50,000 and never looked back. In 1994, the Pampered Chef was
among Inc. magazine’s 500 fastest-growing privately held companies in
the United States, and Christopher has been recognized by Working
Woman magazine as one of the top 500 women business owners.
     Doris Christopher started her business with a passionate belief that
sitting down together at mealtime brings families together in a way that
few other experiences can match. That philosophy has shaped and
guided the Pampered Chef from the beginning, and it is at the core of
the sales approach: a friendly, hands-on pitch to housewives that links
the quality of family life to the quality of kitchen products.
     Many of the company’s “kitchen consultants,” as they are called, are
stay-at-home moms, and most of the sales are conducted in their homes
at “kitchen shows.” These are cooking demonstrations where guests see
products and recipes in action, learn quick and easy food preparation
techniques, and receive tips on how to entertain with style and ease. The
                                                Buying a Business       49

products are professional-quality kitchen tools and pantry food items;
some 80 percent of the products are exclusive to the company or can
only be bought from TPC representatives.
     Today, the Pampered Chef has 950 employees in the United States,
Germany, the United Kingdom, and Canada, and its products are sold
by over 71,000 independent consultants during in-home demonstra-
tions. Over one million kitchen shows were held throughout the United
States in 2002, producing sales of $730 million. And the only debt the
company has ever incurred is the original $3,000 seed money.
     In 2002, Doris Christopher realized that in case she either keeled
over or decided to slow down, the Pampered Chef needed a backup
plan. So, on the advice of her bankers at Goldman Sachs, she approached
Warren Buffett. That August, Christopher and her then CEO, Sheila
O’Connell Cooper, met with Buffett at his headquarters in Omaha. A
month later, Berkshire announced it had bought the company, for a price
thought to be approximately $900 million.
     Recalling that August meeting, Buffett wrote to Berkshire share-
holders, “It took me about ten seconds to decide that these were two
managers with whom I wished to partner, and we promptly made a
deal. I’ve been to a TPC party and it’s easy to see why this business is a
success. The company’s products, in large part proprietary, are well-
styled and highly useful, and the consultants are knowledgeable and en-
thusiastic. Everyone has a good time.”10

                                   
Buffett is often asked what types of companies he will purchase in the
future. First, he says, I will avoid commodity businesses and managers
that I have little confidence in. He has three touchstones: It must be the
type of company that he understands, possessing good economics, and
run by trustworthy managers. That’s also what he looks for in stocks—
and for the same reasons.


INVESTING IN STOCKS

It is patently obvious that few of us are in a position to buy whole com-
panies, as Buffett does. Their stories are included in this chapter because
they give us such crisp insight into Buffett’s way of thinking.
50    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     That same chain of thinking also applies to his decisions about buy-
ing stocks, and that does present some examples that ordinary mortals
might follow. We may not be able to buy shares on the same scale as
Warren Buffett, but we can profit from watching what he does.
     At the end of 2003, Berkshire Hathaway’s common stock portfolio
had a total market value of more than $35 billion (see Table A.27 in the
Appendix)—an increase of almost $27 billion from the original pur-
chase prices. In that portfolio, Berkshire Hathaway owns, among oth-
ers, 200 million shares of Coca-Cola, 96 million shares of the Gillette
Company, and 56-plus million shares of Wells Fargo & Company. Soft
drinks, razor blades, neighborhood banks—products and services that
are familiar to us all. Nothing esoteric, nothing high-tech, nothing
hard to understand. It is one of Buffett’s most strongly held beliefs: It
makes no sense to invest in a company or an industry you don’t under-
stand, because you won’t be able to figure out what it’s worth or to
track what it’s doing.

The Coca-Cola Company
Coca-Cola is the world’s largest manufacturer, marketer, and distribu-
tor of carbonated soft drink concentrates and syrups. The company’s
soft drink product, first sold in the United States in 1886, is now sold in
more than 195 countries worldwide.
     Buffett’s relationship with Coca-Cola dates back to his childhood.
He had his first Coca-Cola when he was five years old. Soon afterward,
he started buying six Cokes for 25 cents from his grandfather’s grocery
store and reselling them in his neighborhood for 5 cents each. For the
next fifty years, Buffett admits, he observed the phenomenal growth of
Coca-Cola, but he purchased textile mills, department stores, and wind-
mill and farming equipment manufacturers. Even in 1986, when he for-
mally announced that Cherry Coke would become the official soft
drink of Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meetings, Buffett had still not
purchased a share of Coca-Cola. It was not until two years later, in the
summer of 1988, that Buffett purchased his first shares of Coca-Cola.
     The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its brand-name products, but
also its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, international
sales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’s
total sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,
                                                 Buying a Business        51

the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, South
America, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China. In 2003, the
company sold more than 19 billion cases of beverage products.
    The best business to own, says Buffett, is one that over time can
employ large amounts of capital at very high rates of return. This de-
scription fits Coca-Cola perfectly. It is easy to understand why Buffett
considers Coca-Cola, the most widely recognized brand name around
the world, to be the world’s most valuable franchise.
    Because of this financial strength, and also because the product is so
well known, I use Coca-Cola as the primary example in Chapters 5
through 8, which detail the tenets of the Warren Buffett Way.



    I buy businesses, not stocks, businesses I would be willing to
    own forever.11
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1998




The Gillette Company
Gillette is an international consumer products company that manufac-
tures and distributes blades and razors, toiletries and cosmetics, stationery
products, electric shavers, small household appliances, and oral care appli-
ances and products. It has manufacturing operations in 14 countries and
distributes its products in over 200 countries and territories. Foreign op-
erations account for over 63 percent of Gillette’s sales and earnings.
    King C. Gillette founded the company at the turn of the twentieth
century. As a young man, Gillette spent time strategizing how he would
make his fortune. A friend suggested that he should invent a product
that consumers would use once, throw away, and replace with another.
While working as a salesperson for Crown Cork & Seal, Gillette hit on
the idea of a disposable razor blade. In 1903, his f ledgling company
began selling the Gillette safety razor with 25 disposable blades for $5.
    Today, Gillette is the world’s leading manufacturer and distributor
of blades and razors. Razor blades account for approximately one-third
of the company’s sales but two-thirds of its profits. Its global share of
52    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

market is 72.5 percent, almost six times greater than the nearest com-
petitor. The company has a 70 percent market share in Europe, 80 per-
cent in Latin America. Sales are just beginning to grow in Eastern
Europe, India, and China. For every one blade that Gillette sells in the
United States, it sells five overseas. In fact, Gillette is so dominant
worldwide that in many languages its name has become the word for
“razor blade.”
     Buffett became interested in Gillette in the 1980s. Wall Street ob-
servers had begun to see the company as a mature, slow-growing con-
sumer company ripe for a takeover. Profit margins hovered between
9 percent and 11 percent, return on equity f lattened out with no sign of
improvement, and income growth and market value were anemic (see
Figures 4.1 and 4.2). In short, the company appeared stagnant.
     CEO Colman Mockler fought off four takeover attempts during
this time, culminating in a hotly contested battle against Coniston Part-
ners in 1988. Gillette won—barely—but in so doing obligated itself to
buy back 19 million shares of Gillette stock at $45 per share. Between
1986 and 1988, the company replaced $1.5 billion in equity with debt,
and for a short period Gillette had a negative net worth.
     At this point Buffett called his friend Joseph Sisco, a member of
Gillette’s board, and proposed that Berkshire invest in the company.
“Gillette’s business is very much the kind we like,” Buffett said.




               Figure 4.1 The Gillette Company return on equity.
                                                  Buying a Business    53




                Figure 4.2 The Gillette Company market value.


“Charlie and I think we understand the company’s economics and
therefore believe we can make a reasonably intelligent guess about its
future.”12 Gillette issued $600 million in convertible preferred stock to
Berkshire in July 1989 and used the funds to pay down debt. Buffett re-
ceived a 8.75 percent convertible preferred security with a mandatory
redemption in ten years and the option to convert into Gillette com-
mon at $50 per share, 20 percent higher than the then-current price.
    In 1989, Buffett joined Gillette’s board of directors. That same year,
the company introduced a highly successful new product, the Sensor. It
was the beginning of a turnaround. With Sensor sales, Gillette’s pros-
perity magnified. Earnings per share began growing at a 20 percent an-
nual rate. Pretax margins increased from 12 to 15 percent and return on
equity reached 40 percent, twice its return in the early 1980s.
    In February 1991, the company announced a 2-for-1 stock split.
Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12 million com-
mon shares or 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding. In less than
two years, Berkshire’s $600 million investment in Gillette had grown
to $875 million. Buffett’s next step was to calculate the value of those
12 million shares; in Chapter 8, we’ll see how he went about it.
    Gillette’s razor blade business is a prime beneficiary of globaliza-
tion. Typically, Gillette begins with low-end blades that have lower
margins and over time introduces improved shaving systems with higher
54    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

margins. The company stands to benefit not only from increasing unit
sales but from steadily improving profit margins as well. Gillette’s fu-
ture appears bright. “It’s pleasant to go to bed every night,” says Buffett,
“knowing there are 2.5 billion males in the world who will have to
shave in the morning.”13

The Washington Post Company
The Washington Post Company today is a media conglomerate with
operations in newspaper publishing, television broadcasting, cable tele-
vision systems, magazine publishing, and the provision of educational
services. The newspaper division publishes the Washington Post, the
Everett (Washington) Herald, and the Gazette Newspapers, a group of
39 weekly papers. The television broadcasting division owns six televi-
sion stations located in Detroit, Miami, Orlando, Houston, San Anto-
nio, and Jacksonville, Florida. The cable television systems division
provides cable and digital video services to more than 1.3 billion sub-
scribers. The magazine division publishes Newsweek, with domestic
circulation of over 3 million and over 600,000 internationally.
     In addition to the four major divisions, the Washington Post Com-
pany owns the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Centers, a large network
of schools that prepare students for college admission tests and profes-
sional licensing exams. Best known for its original program that helps
high school students do well on Scholastic Aptitude Tests, Kaplan has
aggressively expanded its operations in recent years. It now includes
after-school classes for grades K-12, the world’s only accredited online
law school, test-prep materials for engineers and CFAs, and campus-
based schools with programs in business, finance, technology, health,
and other professions. In 2003, Kaplan’s sales totaled $838 million,
making it a significant element in the Post Company.
     The company owns 28 percent of Cowles Media, which publishes
the Minneapolis Star Tribune, several military newspapers, and 50 per-
cent of the Los Angeles-Washington News Service.
     Today, the Washington Post Company is an $8 billion company
generating $3.2 billion in annual sales. Its accomplishments are espe-
cially impressive when you consider that seventy years ago, the com-
pany was in one business—publishing a newspaper.
     In 1931, the Washington Post was one of five dailies competing for
readers. Two years later, the Post, unable to pay for its newsprint, was
                                               Buying a Business       55

placed in receivership. That summer, the company was sold at auction
to satisfy creditors. Eugene Meyer, a millionaire financier, bought the
paper for $825,000. For the next two decades, he supported the opera-
tion until it turned a profit.
     Management of the paper passed to Philip Graham, a brilliant
Harvard-educated lawyer who had married Meyer’s daughter Kather-
ine. In 1954, Phil Graham convinced Eugene Meyer to purchase a rival
newspaper, the Times-Herald. Later, Graham purchased Newsweek
magazine and two television stations before his tragic death in 1963. It
is Phil Graham who is credited with transforming the Washington Post
from a single newspaper into a media and communications company.
     After Phil Graham’s death, control of the Washington Post passed
to his wife, Katherine. Although she had no experience managing a
major corporation, she quickly distinguished herself by confronting dif-
ficult business issues.
     Katherine Graham realized that to be successful the company would
need a decision maker not a caretaker. “I quickly learned that things
don’t stand still,” she said. “You have to make decisions.”14 Two deci-
sions that had a pronounced impact on the Washington Post were hiring
Ben Bradlee as managing editor of the newspaper and then inviting
Warren Buffett to become a director of the company. Bradlee encour-
aged Katherine Graham to publish the Pentagon Papers and to pursue
the Watergate investigation, which earned the Washington Post a repu-
tation for prizewinning journalism. Buffett taught Katherine Graham
how to run a successful business.
     Buffett first met Katherine Graham in 1971. At that time, Buffett
owned stock in the New Yorker. Hearing that the magazine might be
for sale, he asked Katherine Graham whether the Washington Post
would be interested in purchasing it. Although the sale never materi-
alized, Buffett came away very much impressed with the publisher of
the Washington Post.
     That same year, Katherine Graham decided to take the Washington
Post public. Two classes of stock were created. Class A common stock
elected a majority of the board of directors, thus effectively controlling
the company. Class A stock was, and still is, held by the Graham family.
Class B stock elected a minority of the board of directors. In June 1971,
the Washington Post issued 1,354,000 shares of class B stock. Remark-
ably, two days later, despite threats from the federal government, Kather-
ine Graham gave Ben Bradlee permission to publish the Pentagon Papers.
56    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    For the next two years, while business at the paper was improving,
the mood on Wall Street was turning gloomy. In early 1973, the Dow
Jones Industrial Average began to slide. The Washington Post share price
was slipping as well; by May, it was down 14 points to $23. That same
month, IBM stock declined over 69 points, gold broke through $100 an
ounce, the Federal Reserve boosted the discount rate to 6 percent, and
the Dow fell 18 points—its biggest loss in three years. And all the while,
Warren Buffett was quietly buying shares in the Washington Post (see
Figure 4.3). By June, he had purchased 467,150 shares at an average
price of $22.75, worth $10,628,000.
    Katherine Graham was initially unnerved at the idea of a nonfamily
member owning so much Post stock, even though the stock was non-
controlling. Buffett assured her that Berkshire’s purchase was for invest-
ment purposes only. To further reassure her, he offered to give her son
Don, slated to take over the company someday, a proxy to vote Berk-
shire’s shares. That clinched it. Katherine Graham responded by invit-
ing Buffett to join the board of directors in 1974 and soon made him
chairman of the finance committee.
    Katherine Graham died in July 2001, after a fall in which she sus-
tained severe head injuries. Warren Buffett was one of the ushers at her
funeral services at Washington’s National Cathedral.




      Figure 4.3 The Washington Post Company price per share, 1972–1975.
                                                  Buying a Business        57

     Donald E. Graham, son of Phil and Katherine, is chairman of
the board of the Washington Post Company. Don Graham graduated
magna cum laude from Harvard in 1966, having majored in English his-
tory and literature. After graduation, he served two years in the army.
Knowing that he would eventually lead the Washington Post, Graham
decided to get better acquainted with the city. He took the unusual path
of joining the metropolitan police force of Washington, DC, and spent
fourteen months as a patrolman walking the beat in the ninth precinct.
In 1971, Graham went to work at the Washington Post as a Metro re-
porter. Later, he spent ten months as a reporter for Newsweek at the Los
Angeles bureau. Graham returned to the Post in 1974 and became the
assistant managing sports editor. That year, he was added to the com-
pany’s board of directors.
     Buffett’s role at the Washington Post is widely documented. He
helped Katherine Graham persevere during the labor strikes of the
1970s, and he also tutored Don Graham in business, helping him un-
derstand the role of management and its responsibility to its owners.
“In finance,” Don Graham says, “he’s the smartest guy I know. I don’t
know who is second.”15
     Looking at the story from the reverse side, it’s also clear that the Post
has played a major role for Buffett as well. Finance journalist Andrew
Kilpatrick, who has followed Buffett’s career for years, believes that the
Washington Post Company investment “locked up Buffett’s reputation
as a master investor.”16 Berkshire has not sold any of its Washington Post
stock since the original purchase in 1973. In 2004, the Class B stock was
selling for more than $900 a share, making it the second most expensive
stock on the New York Stock Exchange. Berkshire’s holdings are now
worth more than $1 billion, and Buffett’s original investment has in-
creased in value more than fiftyfold.17

Wells Fargo & Company
In October 1990, Berkshire Hathaway announced it had purchased 5
million shares of Wells Fargo & Company at an average price of $57.88
per share, a total investment of $289 million. With this purchase, Berk-
shire became the largest shareholder of the bank, owning 10 percent of
the shares outstanding.
    It was a controversial move. Earlier in the year, the share price
traded as high as $86, then dropped sharply as investors abandoned
58    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

California banks in droves. At the time, the West Coast was in the
throes of a severe recession and some speculated that banks, with their
loan portfolios stocked full of commercial and residential mortgages,
were in trouble. Wells Fargo, with the most commercial real estate of
any California bank, was thought to be particularly vulnerable.
     In the months following Berkshire’s announcement, the battle for
Wells Fargo resembled a heavyweight fight. Buffett, in one corner, was
the bull, betting $289 million that Wells Fargo would increase in value.
In the other corner, short sellers were the bears, betting that Wells Fargo,
already down 49 percent for the year, was destined to fall further. The
rest of the investment world decided to sit back and watch.
     Twice in 1992, Berkshire acquired more shares, bringing the total
to 63 million by year-end. The price crept over $100 per share, but
short sellers were still betting the stock would lose half its value. Buffett
has continued to add to his position, and by year-end 2003, Berkshire
owned more than 56 million shares, with a market value of $4.6 billion
and a total accumulated purchase cost of $2.8 billion. In 2003, Moody’s
gave Wells Fargo a AAA credit rating, the only bank in the country
with that distinction.


THE INTELLIGENT INVESTOR

The most distinguishing trait of Buffett’s investment philosophy is the
clear understanding that by owning shares of stocks he owns businesses,
not pieces of paper. The idea of buying stocks without understanding
the company’s operating functions—its products and services, labor re-
lations, raw material expenses, plant and equipment, capital reinvest-
ment requirements, inventories, receivables, and needs for working
capital—is unconscionable, says Buffett. This mentality ref lects the at-
titude of a business owner as opposed to a stock owner, and is the only
mentality an investor should have. In the summation of The Intelligent
Investor, Benjamin Graham wrote, “Investing is most intelligent when
it is most businesslike.” Those are, says Buffett, “the nine most impor-
tant words ever written about investing.”
     A person who holds stocks has the choice to become the owner of a
business or the bearer of tradable securities. Owners of common stocks
who perceive that they merely own a piece of paper are far removed
                                               Buying a Business       59

from the company’s financial statements. They behave as if the market’s
ever-changing price is a more accurate ref lection of their stock’s value
than the business’s balance sheet and income statement. They draw or
discard stocks like playing cards. For Buffett, the activities of a common
stock holder and a business owner are intimately connected. Both
should look at ownership of a business in the same way. “I am a better
investor because I am a businessman,” Buffett says, “and a better busi-
nessman because I am an investor.”18



                       THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY
    Business Tenets
      1. Is the business simple and understandable?
      2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?
      3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?
    Management Tenets
      4. Is management rational?
      5. Is management candid with its shareholders?
      6. Does management resist the institutional imperative?
    Financial Tenets
      7.   What is the return on equity?
      8.   What are the company’s “owner earnings”?
      9.   What are the profit margins?
     10.   Has the company created at least one dollar of market
           value for every dollar retained?
    Value Tenets
     11. What is the value of the company?
     12. Can it be purchased at a significant discount to its value?
                                    5

         Investing Guidelines
                      Business Tenets



W
          e come now to the heart of the matter—the essence of Warren
          Buffett’s way of thinking about investing. Warren Buffett is so
          thoroughly identified with the stock market that even people
who have no interest in the market know his name and reputation.
Others, those who read the financial pages of the newspaper only casu-
ally, may know him as the head of an unusual company whose stock
sells for upward of $90,000 per share. And even the many new investors
who enthusiastically devote careful attention to market news think of
him primarily as a brilliant stock picker.
     Few would deny that the world’s most famous and most successful
investor is indeed a brilliant stock picker. But that seriously understates
the case. His real gift is picking companies. I mean this in two senses:
First, Berkshire Hathaway, in addition to its famous stock portfolio,
owns many companies directly. Second, when considering new stock
purchases, Buffett looks at the underlying business as thoroughly as he
would if he were buying the whole company, using a set of basic prin-
ciples developed over many years. “When investing,” he says, “we view
ourselves as business analysts—not as market analysts, not as macro-
economic analysts, and not even as security analysts.”1
     If we go back through time and review all of Buffett’s purchases,
looking for the commonalities, we find a set of basic principles, or tenets,

                                                                         61
62     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that have guided his decisions. If we extract these tenets and spread them
out for a closer look, we see that they naturally group themselves into
four categories:

     1. Business tenets. Three basic characteristics of the business itself
     2. Management tenets. Three important qualities that senior man-
        agers must display
     3. Financial tenets. Four critical financial decisions that the com-
        pany must maintain
     4. Value tenets. Two interrelated guidelines about purchase price

     Not all of Buffett’s acquisitions will display all the tenets, but taken
as a group, these tenets constitute the core of his investment approach.
They can also serve as guideposts for all investors. In this chapter, we
look at the first group—the characteristics of the business—and study
how some of Buffett’s investment decisions ref lect those tenets.




     I want to be in businesses so good even a dummy can make
     money.2
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1988



     For Buffett, stocks are an abstraction.3 He does not think in terms of
market theories, macroeconomic concepts, or sector trends. Rather, he
makes investment decisions based only on how a business operates. He
believes that if people choose an investment for superficial reasons instead
of business fundamentals, they are more likely to be scared away at the
first sign of trouble, in all likelihood losing money in the process. Buffett
concentrates on learning all he can about the business under considera-
tion, focusing on three main areas:

     1. Is the business simple and understandable?
     2. Does the business have a consistent operating history?
     3. Does the business have favorable long-term prospects?
                           I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   63

A S I M P L E A N D U N D E R S TA N D A B L E B U S I N E S S

In Buffett’s view, investors’ financial success is correlated to the degree
in which they understand their investment. This understanding is a dis-
tinguishing trait that separates investors with a business orientation from
most hit-and-run investors, people who merely buy shares of stock. It is
critical to the buy-or-don’t-buy decision for this reason: In the final
analysis, after all their research, investors must feel convinced that the
business they are buying into will perform well over time. They must
have some confidence in their estimate of its future earnings, and that has
a great deal to do with how well they understand its business fundamen-
tals. Predicting the future is always tricky; it becomes enormously more
difficult in an arena you know nothing about.
     Over the years, Buffett has owned a vast array of businesses: a gas
station; a farm implementation business; textile companies; a major re-
tailer; banks; insurance companies; advertising agencies; aluminum and
cement companies; newspapers; oil, mineral, and mining companies;
food, beverage, and tobacco companies; television and cable companies.
Some of these companies he controlled, and in others he was or is a mi-
nority shareholder. But in all cases, he was or is acutely aware of how
these businesses operate. He understands the revenues, expenses, cash
f low, labor relations, pricing f lexibility, and capital allocation needs of
every single one of Berkshire’s holdings.
     Buffett is able to maintain a high level of knowledge about Berk-
shire’s businesses because he purposely limits his selections to companies
that are within his area of financial and intellectual understanding. He
calls it his “circle of competence.” His logic is compelling: If you own a
company (either fully or some of its shares) in an industry you do not un-
derstand, it is impossible to accurately interpret developments and there-
fore impossible to make wise decisions. “Invest within your circle of
competence,” he counsels. “It’s not how big the circle is that counts, it’s
how well you define the parameters.”4
     Critics have argued that Buffett’s self-imposed restrictions exclude
him from industries that offer the greatest investment potential, such as
technology. His response: Investment success is not a matter of how
much you know but how realistically you define what you don’t know.
“An investor needs to do very few things right as long as he or she avoids
64    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

big mistakes.”5 Producing above-average results, Buffett has learned,
often comes from doing ordinary things. The key is to do those things
exceptionally well.

Coca-Cola Company
The business of Coca-Cola is relatively simple. The company purchases
commodity inputs and combines them to manufacture a concentrate
that is sold to bottlers. The bottlers then combine the concentrate with
other ingredients and sell the finished product to retail outlets including
minimarts, supermarkets, and vending machines. The company also
provides soft drink syrups to fountain retailers, who sell soft drinks to
consumers in cups and glasses.
     The company’s name brand products include Coca-Cola, Diet
Coke, Sprite, PiBB Xtra, Mello Yello, Fanta soft drinks, Tab, Dasani,
and Fresca. The company’s beverages also include Hi-C brand fruit
drinks, Minute Maid orange juice, Powerade, and Nestea. The company
owns 45 percent of Coca-Cola Enterprises, the largest bottler in the
United States, and 35 percent of Coca-Cola Amatil, an Australian bot-
tler that has interests not only in Australia but also in New Zealand and
Eastern Europe.
     The strength of Coca-Cola is not only its name-brand products but
also its unmatched worldwide distribution system. Today, international
sales of Coca-Cola products account for 69 percent of the company’s
net sales and 80 percent of its profits. In addition to Coca-Cola Amatil,
the company has equity interests in bottlers located in Mexico, South
America, Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and China.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett’s grandfather once owned and edited the Cuming County Demo-
crat, a weekly newspaper in West Point, Nebraska. His grandmother
helped out at the paper and also set the type at the family’s printing shop.
His father, while attending the University of Nebraska, edited the Daily
Nebraskan. Buffett himself was once the circulation manager for the
Lincoln Journal. It has often been said that if Buffett had not embarked
on a business career, he most surely would have pursued journalism.
                                                     ( Text continues on page 67.)
                       CASE IN POINT
                  BENJAMIN MOORE, 2000

In November 2000, Warren Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway
paid about $1 billion for Benjamin Moore & Co., the Mercedes
of paint companies. Founded in 1883 by the Moore brothers in
their Brooklyn basement, Benjamin Moore today is fifth largest
paint manufacturer in the United States and has an unmatched
reputation for quality.
     It was reported that Buffett paid a 25 percent premium over
the stock’s then current price. On the surface, that might seem
to contradict one of Buffett’s iron-clad rules: that he will act
only when the price is low enough to constitute a margin of
safety. However, we also know that Buffett is not afraid to pay
for quality. Even more revealing, the stock price jumped 50
percent to $37.62 per share after the deal was announced. This
tells us that either Buffett found yet another company that was
undervalued or else that the rest of the investing world was bet-
ting on Buffett’s acumen and traded the price up even higher—
or both.
     Benjamin Moore is just the sort of company Buffett likes.
The paint business is nothing if not simple and easy to under-
stand. One of the largest paint manufacturers in the United
States and the tenth largest specialty paint producer, Benjamin
Moore makes one of the finest, if not the finest, architectural
paint in the United States. The company is not just famous for
the quality of its paint, however; architects, designers, and
builders regard Benjamin Moore colors as the gold standard for
their industry. In fact, the company developed the first com-
puterized color matching system, and it is still recognized as the
industry standard. With roughly 3,200 colors, Benjamin Moore
can match almost any shade.
     Buffett also tends to buy companies that have a consistent
operating history and as a result, upon buying a company, he
                                                      (Continued)


                                                                     65
     does not expect to have to change much. His modus operandi is
     to buy companies that are already successful and still have po-
     tential for growth. Benjamin Moore’s current success and status
     in the marketplace over the decades speak to the company’s
     consistent product quality, production, brand strength, and ser-
     vice. Now, 121 years after its founding, the company brings in
     about $80 million of profit on $900 million in sales.
          Looking at Benjamin Moore, Buffett also saw a well-run
     company. Although there were questions a few years ago about
     Moore’s retail strategy, the company has undertaken a brand re-
     juvenation program in the United States and Canada. Benjamin
     Moore increased its retail presence in independent stores with its
     Signature Store Program and bought certain retail stores, such as
     Manhattan-based Janovic, outright. Just before the Berkshire ac-
     quisition in 2000, the company underwent a cost-cutting and
     streamlining program to improve its operations.
          All that adds up to favorable long-term prospects. Benjamin
     Moore is a classic example of a company that has turned a com-
     modity into a franchise. Buffett’s definition of a franchise is one
     where the product is needed or desired, has no close substitute,
     and is unregulated. Most people in the building industry would
     agree that Moore is a master in all three categories. Considering
     the company’s arsenal of over 100 chemists, chemical engineers,
     technicians, and support staff that maintain the company’s strict
     product standards and develop new products, the risk of Ben-
     jamin Moore paints becoming a perishable commodity is slight.
     The on-going and rigorous testing to which all the Moore
     products are subjected is a sign that Benjamin Moore will con-
     tinue to set industry standards. Finally, although Benjamin
     Moore products are not cheap, their quality commands pricing
     power that defeats any notion of inf lation.




66
                         I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   67

    In 1969, Buffett bought his first major newspaper, the Omaha Sun,
along with a group of weekly papers; from them he learned the business
dynamics of a newspaper. He had four years of hands-on experience run-
ning a newspaper before he bought his first share of the Washington Post.

Wells Fargo
Buffett understands the banking business very well. In 1969, Berkshire
bought 98 percent of the Illinois National Bank and Trust Company
and held it until 1979, when the Bank Holding Act required Berkshire
to divest its interest. During that ten-year period, the bank took its
place beside Berkshire’s other controlled holdings and Buffett reported
its sales and earnings each year in Berkshire’s annual reports.
     Just as Jack Ringwalt helped Buffett understand the intricacy of the
insurance business (see Chapter 3), Gene Abegg, who was chairman of
Illinois National Bank, taught Buffett about the banking business. He
learned that banks are profitable businesses as long as loans are issued re-
sponsibly and costs are curtailed. A well-managed bank could not only
grow its earnings but also earn a handsome return on equity.
     The key is “well managed.” The long-term value of a bank, as
Buffett learned, is determined by the actions of its managers, because
they control the two critical variables: costs and loans. Bad managers
have a way of running up the costs of operations while making foolish
loans; good managers are always looking for ways to cut costs and rarely
make risky loans. Carl Reichardt, then chairman of Wells Fargo, had
run the bank since 1983, with impressive results. Under his leadership,
growth in earnings and return on equity were both above average and
operating efficiencies were among the highest in the country. Reichardt
had also built a solid loan portfolio.


CONSISTENCY

Warren Buffett cares very little for stocks that are “hot” at any given
moment. He is far more interested in buying into companies that he be-
lieves will be successful and profitable for the long term. And while
predicting future success is certainly not foolproof, a steady track record
is a relatively reliable indicator. When a company has demonstrated
68    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

consistent results with the same type of products year after year, it is not
unreasonable to assume that those results will continue.
     As long, that is, as nothing major changes. Buffett avoids purchasing
companies that are fundamentally changing direction because their pre-
vious plans were unsuccessful. It has been his experience that under-
going major business changes increases the likelihood of committing
major business errors.
     “Severe change and exceptional returns usually don’t mix,” Buffett
observes.6 Most individuals, unfortunately, invest as if the opposite were
true. Too often, they scramble to purchase stocks of companies that are
in the midst of a corporate reorganization. For some unexplained reason,
says Buffett, these investors are so infatuated with the notion of what to-
morrow may bring that they ignore today’s business reality. In contrast,
Buffett says, his approach is “very much profiting from lack of change.
That’s the kind of business I like.”7
     Buffett also tends to avoid businesses that are solving difficult prob-
lems. Experience has taught him that turnarounds seldom turn. It can be
more profitable to expend energy purchasing good businesses at reason-
able prices than difficult businesses at cheaper prices. “Charlie and I have
not learned how to solve difficult business problems,” Buffett admits.
“What we have learned is to avoid them. To the extent that we have
been successful, it is because we concentrated on identifying one-foot
hurdles that we could step over rather than because we acquired any
ability to clear seven-footers.”8

The Coca-Cola Company
No other company today can match Coca-Cola’s consistent operating
history. This is a business that was started in the 1880s selling a bever-
age product. Today, 120 years later, Coca-Cola is selling the same bev-
erage. Even though the company has periodically invested in unrelated
businesses, its core beverage business has remained largely unchanged.
    The only significant difference today is the company’s size and its
geographic reach. One hundred years ago, the company employed ten
traveling salesmen to cover the entire United States. At that point, the
company was selling 116,492 gallons of syrup a year, for annual sales of
$148,000.9 Fifty years later, in 1938, the company was selling 207 million
                          I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   69

cases of soft drinks annually (having converted sales from gallons to
cases). That year, an article in Fortune noted, “It would be hard to
name any company comparable to Coca-Cola and selling, as Coca-Cola
does, an unchanged product that can point to a ten year record anything
like Coca-Cola’s.”10
     Today, nearly seventy years after that article was published, Coca-
Cola is still selling syrup. The only difference is the increase in quantity.
By the year 2003, the company was selling over 19 billion cases of soft
drink in more than 200 countries, generating $22 billion a year in sales.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett tells Berkshire’s shareholders that his first financial connection
with the Washington Post was at age 13. He delivered both the Wash-
ington Post and the Times-Herald on his paper route while his father
served in Congress. Buffett likes to remind others that with this dual
delivery route he merged the two papers long before Phil Graham
bought the Times-Herald.
    Obviously, Buffett was aware of the newspaper’s rich history. And
he considered Newsweek magazine a predictable business. He quickly
learned the value of the company’s television stations. The Washington
Post had been reporting for years the stellar performance of its broadcast
division. Buffett’s personal experience with the company and its own
successful history led him to believe that the Washington Post was a
consistent and dependable business performer.

Gillette
Few companies have dominated their industry as long as Gillette. It was
the lead brand of razors and blades in 1923 and the lead brand in 2003.
Maintaining that position for so many years has required the company to
spend hundreds of millions of dollars inventing new, improved products.
Even though Wilkinson, in 1962, developed the first coated stainless
steel blade, Gillette bounced back quickly and has since worked hard to
remain the world’s leading innovator of shaving products. In 1972,
Gillette developed the popular twin-blade Trac II; in 1977, the Atra
razor with its pivoting head. Then, in 1989, the company developed the
70     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

popular Sensor, a razor with independently suspended blades. Gillette’s
consistent success is a result of its innovation and patent protection of its
new products.

Clayton Homes
In fiscal year 2002, Clayton reported its twenty-eighth consecutive
year of profits, $126 million, up 16 percent from the year before, on
revenue of $1.2 billion.11 This performance is all the more extraordi-
nary when we consider the fearsome problems that others in the indus-
try experienced. In the late 1990s, over 80 factories and 4,000 retailers
went out of business, a victim of two colliding forces: Many manufac-
turers had expanded too quickly and at the same time had made too
many weak loans, which inevitably led to widespread repossessions, fol-
lowed by diminished demand for new housing.
     Clayton had a different way of doing business (more about their poli-
cies in Chapter 6). Its sound management and skillful handling of rough
times enabled the company to maintain profitability even as competitors
were going bankrupt.


FAV O R A B L E L O N G - T E R M P R O S P E C T S

“We like stocks that generate high returns on invested capital,” Buffett
told those in attendance at Berkshire’s 1995 annual meeting, “where
there is a strong likelihood that it will continue to do so.”12 “I look at
long-term competitive advantage,” he later added, “and [whether] that’s
something that’s enduring.”13 That means he looks for what he terms
franchises.
    According to Buffett, the economic world is divided into a small
group of franchises and a much larger group of commodity businesses,
most of which are not worth purchasing. He defines a franchise as a
company whose product or service (1) is needed or desired, (2) has no
close substitute, and (3) is not regulated.
    Individually and collectively, these create what Buffett calls a moat—
something that gives the company a clear advantage over others and pro-
tects it against incursions from the competition. The bigger the moat, the
more sustainable, the better he likes it. “The key to investing,” he says,
                          I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   71

“is determining the competitive advantage of any given company and,
above all, the durability of that advantage. The products or services that
have wide, sustainable moats around them are the ones that deliver re-
wards to investors.”14 (To see what a moat looks like, read the story of
Larson-Juhl in Chapter 8.)
    A franchise that is the only source of a product people want can
regularly increase prices without fear of losing market share or unit vol-
ume. Often a franchise can raise its prices even when demand is f lat and
capacity is not fully utilized. This pricing f lexibility is one of the defin-
ing characteristics of a franchise; it allows franchises to earn above-
average returns on invested capital.


     Look for the durability of the franchise. The most important
     thing to me is figuring out how big a moat there is around the
     business. What I love, of course, is a big castle and a big moat
     with piranhas and crocodiles.15
                                                         WARREN BUFFETT, 1994



    Another defining characteristic is that franchises possess a greater
amount of economic goodwill, which enables them to better withstand
the effects of inf lation. Another is the ability to survive economic
mishaps and still endure. In Buffett’s succinct phrase, “The definition of
a great company is one that will be great for 25 to 30 years.”16
    Conversely, a commodity business offers a product that is virtually
indistinguishable from the products of its competitors. Years ago, basic
commodities included oil, gas, chemicals, wheat, copper, lumber, and
orange juice. Today, computers, automobiles, airline service, banking,
and insurance have become commodity-type products. Despite mam-
moth advertising budgets, they are unable to achieve meaningful prod-
uct differentiation.
    Commodity businesses, generally, are low-returning businesses and
“prime candidates for profit trouble.”17 Since their product is basically
no different from anyone else’s, they can compete only on the basis of
price, which severely undercuts profit margins. The most dependable
                                                                    ( Text continues on page 77.)
                            CASE IN POINT
                       JUSTIN INDUSTRIES, 2000

     In July 2000, Berkshire Hathaway bought 100 percent of Texas-
     based Justin Industries for $600 million. The company has two
     divisions: Justin Brands, which comprises four brands of West-
     ern boots, and Acme Building Brands, with companies that
     make bricks and other building products.
         Cowboy boots and bricks. It is one of Berkshire’s most in-
     teresting, and most colorful, acquisitions. And it says a great
     deal about Warren Buffett.
         In many ways, Justin epitomizes all the business strengths
     that Buffett looks for. Clearly, it is simple and understandable;
     there’s nothing particularly complex about boots or bricks. It
     represents a remarkably consistent operating history, as a look
     at the separate companies will show; all have been at the same
     business for many decades, and most are at least a century old.
     Finally, and most especially, Buffett recognized favorable long-
     term prospects, because of one aspect that he highly admires: in
     what are essentially commodity industries, the products have
     achieved franchise status.
     Justin Brands
     The company that is now Justin began in 1879 when H. J. ( Joe)
     Justin, who was then 20 years old, started making boots for
     cowboys and ranchers from his small shop in Spanish Fort,
     Texas, near the Chisholm Trail. When Joe died in 1918, his
     sons John and Earl took over and in 1925 moved the company
     to Fort Worth. In 1948, Joe’s grandson John Jr. bought out his
     relatives (except Aunt Enid), and guided the business for the
     next fifty years.
         John Justin Jr. was a legendary figure in Fort Worth. He
     built an empire of Western boots by acquiring three rival com-
     panies, worked out the deal to buy Acme Bricks in 1968, and
     served a term as Fort Worth mayor. He retired in 1999, but
     stayed on as chairman emeritus, and that’s why, at the age of 83,
     it was he who welcomed Warren Buffett to town in April 2000.


72
    Justin Boots, known for rugged, long-lasting boots for
working cowboys, remains the f lagship brand. But Justin Brands
includes other names.
•   Nocona, founded in 1925 by Enid Justin. One of Joe
    Justin’s seven children, Enid started working in her father’s
    company when she was twelve. After her nephews moved
    the family business from the small town of Nocona, Texas,
    to Fort Worth in 1925, Enid set up a rival company in the
    original locale. Against all odds, she built a success. Fierce
    competitors for years, the two companies were joined under
    the Justin name in 1981. Enid, who was then 85, reluctantly
    agreed to the merger because of her declining health.
•   Chippewa, founded in 1901 as a maker of boots for log-
    gers, today makes sturdy hiking boots and quality outdoor
    work boots. It was acquired by Justin in 1985.
•   Tony Lama, which dates back to 1911, when Tony Lama,
    who had been a cobbler in the U.S. Army, opened a shoe-
    repair and boot-making shop in El Paso. The boots quickly
    became a favorite of local ranchers and cowboys who valued
    the good fit and long-lasting quality. In recent years, for
    many the Tony Lama name has become synonymous with
    high-end boots handcrafted from exotic leathers such as boa,
    alligator, turtle, and ostrich, many with prices near $500. In
    1990, Tony Lama Jr., chairman and CEO, agreed to merge
    with archrival Justin.
    Two groups of people buy Western-style boots: those who
wear them day in and day out, because they can’t imagine
wearing anything else; and those who wear them as fashion.
The first group is the heart of Justin’s customer base, but the
second group, while smaller, does have an impact on sales vol-
ume as fashion trends twist and turn.
    When big-name designers like Ralph Lauren and Calvin
Klein show Western styles in their catalogs, boot sales climb. But
fashion is notoriously fickle, and the company struggled in the
late 1990s. After a peak in 1994, the sales of Western boots
began to decline. In 1999, Justin’s stock price dipped below $13.
                                                      (Continued)


                                                                     73
          John Justin Jr. retired in April 1999, and John Roach, former
     head of the Tandy Corp., came in to lead a restructuring. In just
     over a year, the new management engineered an impressive
     turnaround—adding new footwear products, consolidating the
     existing lines to eliminate duplicate designs, and instituting effi-
     ciencies in manufacturing and distribution. In April 2000, the
     streamlined company announced first quarter results: footwear
     sales rose 17 percent to $41.1 million, and both net earnings and
     gross margins increased significantly.
          Two months later, Berkshire Hathaway announced it had
     reached an agreement to buy the company, prompting Bear
     Stearns analyst Gary Schneider to comment, “This is good
     news for employees. Management made all the changes last
     year. They’ve already taken the tough measures necessary to
     lower costs.”18
          Today the boot division of Justin has 4,000 vendors and
     about 35 percent of the Western footwear market; in stores that
     specialize in Western apparel, some 70 percent of the boots on
     the shelves are Justin brands. Most prices start at around $100.
     In the higher price brackets (several hundred dollars and up),
     Justin has about 65 percent of market share.
     Acme Building Brands
     The other division of Justin Industries is also a pioneer Texas
     company that is more than a century old. Founded in 1891 in
     Milsap, Texas, Acme became a Justin company in 1968, when
     John Justin Jr. bought it. Today, Acme is the largest and most
     profitable brick manufacturer in the country.
          Because long-distance shipping costs are prohibitive, bricks
     tend to be a regional product. Acme dominates its region
     (Texas and five surrounding states) with more than 50 percent
     of market share. In its six-state area, Acme has 31 production
     facilities, including 22 brick plants, its own sales offices, and
     its own f leet of trucks. Builders, contractors, and homeowners
     can order bricks direct from the company, and they will be
     delivered on Acme trucks. Acme sells more than one billion


74
bricks a year, each one stamped with the Acme logo, and each
one guaranteed for 100 years.
     Demand for bricks is tied to housing starts and, therefore,
subject to changes in interest rates and in the overall economy.
Even a run of bad weather can affect sales. Nonetheless, Acme
fared better during the techno-crazed 1990s than the boot
companies, and today is still the chief Justin money-maker. In
addition to its bricks, Acme Building Brands includes Feather-
lite Building Products Corporation (concrete masonry) and
the American Tile Supply Company, maker of ceramic and
marble tiles.
The Berkshire Deal
For years Justin was largely ignored by Wall Street. With just
two divisions, it was not large enough to be a conglomerate.
Yet, operating in two different categories made it something of
a puzzlement. As John Justin noted in 1999, just before he re-
tired, “The analysts who understand the footwear business
don’t understand the building materials business, and the other
way around.”19
     Warren Buffett understands both. For one thing, Berk-
shire already owned several footwear companies, so he had
years to learn the industry. More to the point, he understands
stable, steady businesses that make products people never stop
needing.
     And the timing was right. The company with a reputation
for more than 100 years of quality was facing rocky times; its
stock price had dropped 37 percent over the prior five years, and
there was pressure to split the company into two parts. Buffett’s
well-known preference for simple, low-tech businesses made
this a perfect fit.
     When Buffett first met with John Justin in Fort Worth, he
remarked that the city reminded him of Omaha; he meant it as
a great compliment. When he looked into the two components
of the company, he saw something else he admires: franchise
                                                     (Continued)


                                                                    75
     quality. Both divisions of Justin have managed to turn them-
     selves into a franchise, through a combination of top quality,
     good marketing, and shrewd positioning.
          Acme sells a product that most people consider a commodity.
     Who, after all, can name the brand of bricks they prefer? Acme
     customers, that’s who. With a skillful marketing campaign fea-
     turing football legend Troy Aikman, Acme has made itself so
     well known that when Texans were recently asked to name their
     favorite brand of brick, 75 percent of respondents said Acme.
     That brand consciousness is reinforced every time a consumer
     picks up a brick and sees the Acme logo stamped into it.
          The boots, too, have established themselves as franchises.
     Spend a few minutes in any Western-apparel retail outlet, and
     you’ll hear customers say things like “My son is ready for some
     new Justins” or “Show me what you’ve got in Tony Lamas”
     more often than you hear “I’m looking for some cowboy boots.”
     When they mention the boots by name, and when they’re will-
     ing to pay top price for top quality, that’s a franchise.
          After the improvements of its new management team in
     1999 and 2000, Justin began attracting attention. According to
     Bear Stearns analyst Gary Schneider, there was widespread in-
     terest from many buyers, including Europeans, but Buffett’s
     was the first offer the company seriously contemplated.20
          Berkshire’s offer was for $22 per share in cash. That repre-
     sented a 23 percent premium over closing stock price, but Buf-
     fett was not fazed. “It was a chance to get not only one good
     business but two good businesses at one time,” he remarked.
     “A double dip, in effect. First-class businesses with first-class
     managements, and that’s just what we look for.” Nor, he
     added, did he have plans to change anything. “We buy business
     that are running well to start with. If they needed me in Fort
     Worth, we wouldn’t be buying it.”21 The day after the deal
     was announced, Justin’s stock price jumped 22 percent, and
     Warren Buffett returned to Omaha with a brand-new pair of
     ostrich-skin Tony Lamas.



76
                         I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   77

way to make a commodity business profitable, then, is to be the low-
cost provider.
     The only other time commodity businesses turn a profit is during
periods of tight supply—a factor that can be extremely difficult to
predict. In fact, a key to determining the long-term profitability of
a commodity business, Buffett notes, is the ratio of “supply-tight to
supply-ample years.” This ratio, however, is often fractional. The most
recent supply-tight period in Berkshire’s textile division, Buffett quips,
lasted the “better part of a morning.”

The Coca-Cola Company
Shortly after Berkshire’s 1989 public announcement that it owned 6.3
percent of the Coca-Cola Company, Buffett was interviewed by Mel-
lisa Turner, a business writer for the Atlanta Constitution. She asked
Buffett a question he has been asked often: Why hadn’t he purchased
shares in the company sooner? By way of answer, Buffett related what
he was thinking at the time he finally made the decision.
     “Let’s say you were going away for ten years,” he explained, “and
you wanted to make one investment and you know everything that you
know now, and you couldn’t change it while you’re gone. What would
you think about?” Of course, the business would have to be simple and
understandable. Of course, the company would have to have demon-
strated a great deal of business consistency over the years. And of
course, the long-term prospects would have to be favorable. “If I came
up with anything in terms of certainty, where I knew the market was
going to continue to grow, where I knew the leader was going to con-
tinue to be the leader—I mean worldwide—and where I knew there
would be big unit growth, I just don’t know anything like Coke. I’d be
relatively sure that when I came back they would be doing a hell of a lot
more business than they do now.”22
     But why purchase at that particular time? Coca-Cola’s business at-
tributes, as described by Buffett, have existed for several decades. What
caught his eye, he confesses, were the changes occurring at Coca-Cola,
during the 1980s, under the leadership of Roberto Goizueta.
     Goizueta, raised in Cuba, was Coca-Cola’s first foreign chief exec-
utive officer. In 1980, Robert Woodruff, the company’s 91-year-old
patriarch, brought him in to correct the problems that had plagued the
78    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

company during the 1970s. It was a dismal period for Coca-Cola—dis-
putes with bottlers, accusations of mistreatment of migrant workers at
the company’s Minute Maid groves, environmentalists’ claim that
Coke’s “one way” containers contributed to the country’s growing pol-
lution problem, and the Federal Trade Commission charge that the
company’s exclusive franchise system violated the Sherman Anti-Trust
Act. Coca-Cola’s international business was reeling as well.
     One of Goizueta’s first acts was to bring together Coca-Cola’s top
fifty managers for a meeting in Palm Springs, California. “Tell me
what we’re doing wrong,” he said. “I want to know it all and once it’s
settled, I want 100 percent loyalty. If anyone is not happy, we will make
you a good settlement and say goodbye.”23
     Goizueta encouraged his managers to take intelligent risks. He
wanted Coca-Cola to initiate action rather than to be reactive. He began
cutting costs. And he demanded that any business that Coca-Cola owned
must optimize its return on assets. These actions immediately translated
into increasing profit margins. And captured the attention of Warren
Buffett.

The Washington Post Company
“The economics of a dominant newspaper,” Buffett once wrote, “are
excellent, among the very best in the world.”24 The vast majority of
U.S. newspapers operate without any direct competition. The owners of
those newspapers like to believe that the exceptional profits they earn
each year are a result of their paper’s journalistic quality. The truth, said
Buffett, is that even a third-rate newspaper can generate adequate prof-
its if it is the only paper in town. That makes it a classic franchise, with
all the benefits thereof.
     It is true that a high-quality paper will achieve a greater penetration
rate, but even a mediocre paper, he explains, is essential to a community
for its “bulletin board” appeal. Every business in town, every home seller,
every individual who wants to get a message out to the community needs
the circulation of a newspaper to do so. The paper’s owner receives, in ef-
fect, a royalty on every business in town that wants to advertise.
     In addition to their franchise quality, newspapers possess valuable
economic goodwill. As Buffett points out, newspapers have low capital
needs, so they can easily translate sales into profits. Even expensive
                         I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : B u s i n e s s Te n e t s   79

computer-assisted printing presses and newsroom electronic systems are
quickly paid for by lower fixed wage costs. Newspapers also are able to
increase prices relatively easily, thereby generating above-average re-
turns on invested capital and reducing the harmful effects of inf lation.
Buffett figures that a typical newspaper could double its price and still
retain 90 percent of its readership.

The McLane Company
McLane is perched on the edge of great growth potential. Now that it
is no longer part of Wal-Mart, it is free to pursue arrangements with
Wal-Mart’s competitors, such as Target and other large stores in the
United States. This, combined with the company’s focus on efficiency
and investment in enterprise-wide software systems, freight manage-
ment, and point-of-sales systems among other automated processes, will
enable McLane to maintain price efficiency and service quality.
    At the time Buffett bought McLane, some of the industry players,
such as Fleming and U.S. Food Service, a division of Royal Ahold,
were going through difficult times for various reasons. Although it is
doubtful that this inf luenced Buffett’s decision, it was said at the time
that if Fleming did indeed go under, an extra $7 billion worth of busi-
ness would be up for grabs.

The Pampered Chef
The Pampered Chef has demonstrated a consistency that many older
businesses might well envy, with a growth rate of 22 percent each year
from 1995 to 2001. And the long-term outlook is strong. According to
the Direct Selling Association, party plan businesses raked in more than
$7 billion nationwide in 2000, an increase of $2.7 billion since 1996.
    Christopher herself is not slowing down. She believes that Ameri-
can cupboards have plenty of room for more products and points out
that Mary Kay, a direct-sell cosmetics company, has a sales force of
600,000—giving her plenty of room to grow. Christopher is develop-
ing new products, such as ceramic serving ware, and is expanding into
Canada, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Finally, the company is
structured in such a way that it does not need a lot of capital to expand
and it has no sizable competition in its category.
                                   6

         Investing Guidelines
                  Management Tenets



W
         hen considering a new investment or a business acquisition,
         Buffett looks very hard at the quality of management. He tells
         us that the companies or stocks Berkshire purchases must be
operated by honest and competent managers whom he can admire and
trust. “We do not wish to join with managers who lack admirable qual-
ities,” he says, “no matter how attractive the prospects of their business.
We’ve never succeeded in making a good deal with a bad person.”1
     When he finds managers he admires, Buffett is generous with his
praise. Year after year, readers of the Chairman’s Letter in Berkshire’s
annual reports find Buffett’s warm words about those who manage the
various Berkshire companies.
     He is just as thorough when it comes to the management of com-
panies whose stock he has under consideration. In particular, he looks
for three traits:

    1. Is management rational?
    2. Is management candid with the shareholders?
    3. Does management resist the institutional imperative?

    The highest compliment Buffett can pay a manager is that he or she
unfailingly behaves and thinks like an owner of the company. Managers

                                                                        81
82     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

who behave like owners tend not to lose sight of the company’s prime
objective—increasing shareholder value—and they tend to make rational
decisions that further that goal. Buffett also greatly admires managers
who take seriously their responsibility to report fully and genuinely to
shareholders and who have the courage to resist what he has termed the
institutional imperative—blindly following industry peers.


     When you have able managers of high character running busi-
     nesses about which they are passionate, you can have a dozen or
     more reporting to you and still have time for an afternoon nap.2
                                              WARREN BUFFETT, 1986



    All this has taken on a new level of urgency, as shocking discoveries
of corporate wrongdoings have come to light. Buffett has always insisted
on doing business only with people of the highest integrity. Sometimes
that stance has put him at odds with other well-known names in the
corporate world. It has not always been fashionable in business circles to
speak of integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness as qualities to be ad-
mired. In fact, at times such talk might have been disparaged as naive
and out of touch with business reality. It is a particularly sweet bit of
poetic justice that Buffett’s stand on corporate integrity now seems to
be a brilliant strategy. But his motivation is not strategic: It comes from
his own unshakable value system. And no one has ever seriously accused
Warren Buffett of being naive.
    Later in this chapter, we look more deeply into Buffett’s responses to
these issues of ethical corporate behavior, particularly excessive executive
compensation, stock options, director independence and accountability,
and accounting trickery. He tells us what he thinks must be changed to
protect shareholder interests and gives us ideas on how investors can eval-
uate managers to determine whether they are trustworthy.


R AT I O N A L I T Y

The most important management act, Buffett believes, is allocation of
the company’s capital. It is the most important because allocation of
                                                     ( Text continues on page 85.)
                       CASE IN POINT
               SHAW INDUSTRIES, 2000–2002

In late 2000, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway group agreed
to acquire 87 percent of Shaw Industries, the world’s largest car-
pet manufacturer, for $19 per share, or approximately $2 billion.
Although the price was a 56 percent premium over the trading
price of $12.19, Shaw’s share price had been a good deal higher
a year earlier. Buffett paid the premium because the company
had so many of the qualities he likes to see: The business was
simple and understandable, had a consistent operating history,
and exhibited favorable long-term prospects.
     Carpet manufacturing is not simplistic, given the gargantuan
and complicated machines that spin, dye, tuft, and weave, but
the basic premise is simple and understandable: to make the best
carpets possible and sell them profitably. Shaw now produces
about 27,000 styles and colors of tufted and woven carpet for
homes and commercial use. It also sells f looring and project
management services. It has more than 100 manufacturing plants
and distribution centers and makes more than 600 million
square yards of carpet a year and employs about 30,000 workers.
     Buffett clearly believed that people would need carpets and
f looring for a long time to come and that Shaw would be there to
provide them. That translates to excellent long-term prospects,
one of Buffett’s requirements.
     What really attracted Buffett, however, was the company’s
senior management. In his 2000 annual report to shareholders,
he commented about the Shaw transaction. “A key feature of
the deal was that Julian Saul, president, and Bob Shaw, CEO,
were to continue to own at least 5 percent of Shaw. This leaves
us associated with the best in the business as shown by Bob and
Julian’s record: Each built a large, successful carpet business be-
fore joining forces in 1998.”3
     From 1960 to 1980, the company delivered a 27 percent av-
erage annual return on investment. In 1980, Bob Shaw predicted
                                                      (Continued)




                                                                      83
     that his company would quadruple its $214 million in sales in
     ten years; he did it in eight years.
         Clearly, Bob Shaw managed his company well, and in a
     way that fits neatly with Buffett’s approach. “You have to
     grow from earnings,” Shaw said. “If you use that as your phi-
     losophy—that you grow out of earnings rather than by borrow-
     ing—and you manage your balance sheet, then you never get
     into serious trouble.”4
         This type of thinking is right up Buffett Alley. He believes
     that management’s most important act is the allocation of capi-
     tal and that this allocation, over time, will determine share-
     holder value. In Buffett’s mind, the issue is simple: If extra cash
     can be reinvested internally and produce a return higher than
     the cost of capital, then the company should retain its earnings
     and reinvest them, which is exactly what Shaw did.
         It was not just that Bob Shaw made good financial deci-
     sions, he also made strong product and business decisions by
     adapting to changing market conditions. For example, Shaw
     retrofitted all of its machines in 1986 when DuPont came out
     with new stain-resistant fibers. “Selling is just meeting people,
     figuring out what they need, and supplying their needs,” Shaw
     said. “But those needs are ever changing. So if you’re doing
     business the same way you did it five years ago, or even two
     years ago—you’re doing it wrong.”5
         Shaw’s strong management is ref lected in the company’s
     consistent operating history. It has grown to the number one
     carpet seller in the world, overcoming changing marketplace
     conditions, changes in technology, and even the loss of major
     outlets. In 2002, Sears, one of Shaw’s largest vendors at the time,
     closed its carpet business. But the management appeared to see
     those difficulties more as challenges to overcome rather than
     barriers to success.
         In 2002, Berkshire bought the remaining portion of Shaw
     that it did not already own. By 2003, Shaw was bringing in
     $4.6 billion in sales. Except for the insurance segment, it is
     Berkshire’s largest company.


84
                     I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   85

capital, over time, determines shareholder value. Deciding what to do
with the company’s earnings—reinvest in the business, or return money
to shareholders—is, in Buffett’s mind, an exercise in logic and rational-
ity. “Rationality is the quality that Buffett thinks distinguishes his style
with which he runs Berkshire—and the quality he often finds lacking in
other corporations,” writes Carol Loomis of Fortune. 6
     The issue usually becomes important when a company reaches a cer-
tain level of maturity, where its growth rate slows and it begins to gen-
erate more cash than it needs for development and operating costs. At
that point, the question arises: How should those earnings be allocated?
     If the extra cash, reinvested internally, can produce an above-average
return on equity—a return that is higher than the cost of capital—then
the company should retain all its earnings and reinvest them. That is the
only logical course. Retaining earnings to reinvest in the company at
less than the average cost of capital is completely irrational. It is also
quite common.
     A company that provides average or below-average investment re-
turns but generates cash in excess of its needs has three options: (1) It
can ignore the problem and continue to reinvest at below-average rates,
(2) it can buy growth, or (3) it can return the money to shareholders. It
is at this crossroad that Buffett keenly focuses on management. It is here
that managers will behave rationally or irrationally.
     Generally, managers who continue to reinvest despite below-
average returns do so in the belief that the situation is temporary. They
are convinced that, with managerial prowess, they can improve their
company’s profitability. Shareholders become mesmerized with man-
agement’s forecast of improvements.
     If a company continually ignores this problem, cash will become an
increasingly idle resource and the stock price will decline. A company
with poor economic returns, a lot of cash, and a low stock price will at-
tract corporate raiders, which often is the beginning of the end of cur-
rent management tenure. To protect themselves, executives frequently
choose the second option instead: purchasing growth by acquiring an-
other company.
     Announcing acquisition plans excites shareholders and dissuades cor-
porate raiders. However, Buffett is skeptical of companies that need to
buy growth. For one thing, it often comes at an overvalued price. For
                                                                    ( Text continues on page 89.)
                             CASE IN POINT
                       FRUIT   OF THE   LOOM, 2002

     In 2002, Warren Buffett bought the core business (apparel) of
     bankrupt Fruit of the Loom for $835 million in cash. With the
     purchase, Berkshire acquired two strong assets: an outstanding
     manager and one of the country’s best-known and best-loved
     brand names. It also acquired some $1.6 billion in debt, and a
     bitter history of ill will among shareholders, suppliers, retailers,
     and consumers.
          The company that sells one-third of all men’s and boys’ un-
     derwear in the United States started as a small Rhode Island mill
     in 1851. Over the next century, it grew into the nation’s leading
     maker of underwear and T-shirts. It could not, however, escape
     the economic struggles that increasingly threatened the apparel
     industry, and in 1985 was snapped up by financier William Far-
     ley, known for acquiring financially troubled companies.
          Farley, often described as “f lashy” and “f lamboyant,”
     guided the company through a few years of growth and then
     into a disastrous decline. Everything seemed to go wrong. An
     aggressive $900 million acquisitions program left the company
     over-leveraged—long-term debt was 128 percent of common
     shareholders’ equity in 1996—without providing the expected
     rise in revenues. Suppliers went unpaid and stopped shipping raw
     materials. Farley moved 95 percent of manufacturing operations
     offshore, closing more than a dozen U.S. plants and displacing
     some 16,000 workers, only to find that the net result was serious
     problems of quality control and on-time delivery. To counteract
     the delivery snafus, he parceled out the manufacturing to con-
     tract firms, adding enormous layers of overtime costs. He created
     a holding company for Fruit of the Loom and moved its head-
     quarters to the Cayman Islands, avoiding U.S. taxes on foreign
     sales but triggering a massive public relations headache.
          The headache got worse when Farley, in a maneuver that is
     now illegal, convinced his hand-picked board to guarantee a


86
personal bank loan of $65 million in case he defaulted—which
he did. The board, which earlier had set his compensation at
nearly $20 million and repriced stock options to significantly
favor key executives, then forgave $10 million of the loan.
     In spite of the cost-cutting attempts, the company was
sinking deeper into the red. In 1999, Fruit of the Loom posted
losses of $576 million, seven times larger than analysts’ expec-
tations; and gross margins sagged to a paltry 2 percent, not
enough to cover the $100 million interest expense needed to
service its $1.4 billion debt. That same year the Council of In-
stitutional Investors listed Fruit of the Loom as one of the na-
tion’s twenty most underperforming companies. Shareholders
cringed as the stock price plunged: From $44 a share in early
1997 to just over $1 by the end of 1999; in that one year, 1999,
the shares lost more than 90 percent of their value.
     Few were surprised, therefore, when the company filed for
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in December 1999. The com-
pany’s shares sank even lower, and by October 2001 were down
to $0.23.
     So why would Warren Buffett be interested? Two reasons:
a very strong brand that offered growth potential under the
right management, and the arrival of a man on a white horse.
     John B. Holland had been a highly respected executive
with Fruit of the Loom for more than twenty years, including
several years as president and CEO, when he retired in 1996. In
2000, he was brought back as executive vice-president charged
with revamping operations.
     Holland represents a perfect example of the management
qualities Buffett insists upon. Although publicly he remained
largely silent about Farley, beyond a brief reference to “poor
management,” Buffett has made no secret of his disdain for ex-
ecutives who bully their boards into sweet compensation deals,
and boards that allow it. In contrast, he is enthusiastically vocal
about his admiration for Holland.
                                                      (Continued)



                                                                      87
          He explained his thinking to Berkshire shareholders: “John
     Holland was responsible for Fruit’s operations in its most boun-
     tiful years. . . . [After the bankruptcy] John was rehired, and he
     undertook a major reworking of operations. Before John’s re-
     turn, deliveries were chaotic, costs soared, and relations with key
     customers deteriorated. . . . He’s been restoring the old Fruit of
     the Loom, albeit in a much more competitive environment. [In
     our purchase offer] we insisted on a very unusual proviso: John
     had to be available to continue serving as CEO after we took
     over. To us, John and the brand are Fruit’s key assets.”7
          Since Holland took the reins, Fruit of the Loom has under-
     gone a massive restructuring to lower its costs. It slashed its
     freight costs, reduced overtime, and trimmed inventory levels. It
     disposed of sideline businesses, eliminated unprofitable product
     lines, found new efficiencies in manufacturing process, and
     worked to restore customer satisfaction by filling orders on time.
          Almost immediately, improvement was apparent. Earnings
     increased, operating expenses decreased. In 2000, gross earnings
     rose by $160.3 million—a 222 percent increase—compared to
     1999, and gross margin increased 11 percentage points. The
     company reported an operating loss in 2000 of $44.2 million,
     compared to the 1999 loss of $292.3 million. Even more reveal-
     ing of improvement are the fourth-quarter results—an operating
     loss of $13.5 million (which included one-time consolidation
     costs related to the closure of four U.S. plants) in 2000, com-
     pared to $218.6 million—more than sixteen times greater—just
     one year earlier.
          In 2001, the positive trend continued. Gross earnings grew
     another $72.5 million, a 31 percent increase over 2000, and gross
     margin increased 7.7 percentage points to 22.7 percent for the
     year. That means the company ended 2001 with operating earn-
     ings of $70.1 million, compared to 2000’s $44.2 million loss.
          Of course monumental problems such as the company faced
     are not fully corrected overnight, and Fruit of the Loom must
     still operate in a ferociously competitive industry environment,
     but so far Buffett is pleased with the company’s performance.


88
                     I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   89


        Lest anyone still consider buying a debt-ridden bankrupt
    company a surprising move, there was also a third reason for
    Buffett’s decision, which should come as no surprise whatso-
    ever: He was able to acquire the company on very favorable fi-
    nancial terms. For details, see Chapter 8.
        Buying an underwear maker creates lots of opportunities
    for corny jokes, and Buffett, an accomplished punster, made the
    most of it. At the 2002 shareholders meeting, when asked the
    obvious question, he teased the audience with a half answer:
    “When I wear underwear at all, which I rarely do . . .” Leaving
    the crowd to decide for themselves whether it’s boxers or briefs
    for Buffett. He pointed out why there’s “a favorable bottom
    line” in underwear: “It’s an elastic market.” Finally, he dead-
    panned, Charlie Munger had given him an additional reason to
    buy the company: “For years Charlie has been telling me,
    ‘Warren, we have to get into women’s underwear.’ Charlie is
    78. It’s now or never.”8




another, a company that must integrate and manage a new business is apt
to make mistakes that could be costly to shareholders.
      In Buffett’s mind, the only reasonable and responsible course for
companies that have a growing pile of cash that cannot be reinvested at
above-average rates is to return that money to the shareholders. For that,
two methods are available: raising the dividend or buying back shares.
      With cash in hand from their dividends, shareholders have the oppor-
tunity to look elsewhere for higher returns. On the surface, this seems to
be a good deal, and therefore many people view increased dividends as a
sign of companies that are doing well. Buffett believes that this is so only
if investors can get more for their cash than the company could generate
if it retained the earnings and reinvested in the company.
      Over the years, Berkshire Hathaway has earned very high returns
from its capital and has retained all its earnings. With such high returns,
shareholders would have been ill served if they were paid a dividend.
Not surprisingly, Berkshire does not pay a dividend. And that’s just fine
90    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

with the shareholders. The ultimate test of owners’ faith is allowing
management to reinvest 100 percent of earnings; Berkshire’s owners’
faith in Buffett is high.
     If the real value of dividends is sometimes misunderstood, the second
mechanism for returning earnings to the shareholders—stock repur-
chase—is even more so. The benefit to the owners is in many respects
less direct, less tangible, and less immediate.
     When management repurchases stock, Buffett feels that the reward is
twofold. If the stock is selling below its intrinsic value, then purchasing
shares makes good business sense. If a company’s stock price is $50 and its
intrinsic value is $100, then each time management buys its stock, they
are acquiring $2 of intrinsic value for every $1 spent. Such transactions
can be highly profitable for the remaining shareholders.
     Furthermore, says Buffett, when executives actively buy the com-
pany’s stock in the market, they are demonstrating that they have the
best interests of their owners at hand rather than a careless need to ex-
pand the corporate structure. That kind of stance sends good signals to
the market, attracting other investors looking for a well-managed com-
pany that increases shareholders’ wealth. Frequently, shareholders are re-
warded twice; first from the initial open market purchase and then
subsequently from the positive effect of investor interest on price.

Coca-Cola
Growth in net cash f low has allowed Coca-Cola to increase its dividend
to shareholders and also repurchase its shares in the open market. In
1984, the company authorized its first-ever buyback, announcing it
would repurchase 6 million shares of stock. Since then, the company has
repurchased more than 1 billion shares. This represented 32 percent of
the shares outstanding as of January 1, 1984, at an average price per share
of $12.46. In other words, the company spent approximately $12.4 bil-
lion to buy in shares that only ten years later would have a market value
of approximately $60 billion.
     In July 1992, the company announced that through the year 2000, it
would buy back 100 million shares of its stock, representing 7.6 percent
of the company’s outstanding shares. Remarkably, because of its strong
cash-generating abilities, the company was able to accomplish this while
it continued its aggressive investment in overseas markets.
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   91

American Express
Buffett’s association with American Express dates back some forty
years, to his bold purchase of its distressed stock in 1963, and the astro-
nomical profits he quickly earned for his investment partners (see
Chapter 1 for the full story). Buffett’s faith in the company has not di-
minished, and he has continued to purchase its stock. A big buy in 1994
can be traced to management decisions, both good and bad, about the
use of excess cash.
     The division of the company that issues the charge card and travel-
ers’ checks, American Express Travel Related Services, contributes the
lion’s share of profits. It has always generated substantial owner earn-
ings and has easily funded its own growth. In the early 1990s, it was
generating more cash than it needed for operations—the very point at
which management actions collide with Buffett’s acid test. In this case,
American Express management did not do well.
     Then-CEO James Robinson decided to use excess cash to build the
company into a financial services powerhouse by buying other related
businesses. His first acquisition, IDS Financial Services, proved prof-
itable. But then he bought Shearson Lehman, which did not. Over
time, Shearson needed more and more cash to carry its operations.
When Shearson had swallowed up $4 billion, Robinson contacted Buf-
fett, who agreed to buy $300 million worth of preferred shares. Until
the company got back on track, he was not at all interested in buying
common stock.
     In 1992, Robinson abruptly resigned and was replaced by Harvey
Golub. He set himself the immediate task of strengthening brand
awareness. Striking a familiar tone with Buffett, he began using terms
such as franchise and brand value to describe the American Express
Card. Over the next two years, Golub began to liquidate the company’s
underperforming assets and to restore profitability and high returns on
equity. One of his first actions was to get rid of Shearson Lehman, with
its massive capital needs.
     Soon American Express was showing signs of its old profitable self.
The resources of the company were solidly behind Golub’s goal of build-
ing the American Express Card into “the world’s most respected service
brand,” and every communication from the company emphasized the
franchise value of the name “American Express.”
92    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     Next, Golub set financial targets for the company: to increase earn-
ings per share by 12 to 15 percent a year and 18 to 20 percent return on
equity. Before long, the company was again generating excess cash and
had more capital and more shares than it needed. Then, in September
1994 the company announced that, subject to market conditions, it
planned to repurchase 20 million shares of its common stock. That was
music to Buffett’s ears.
     That summer, Buffett had converted Berkshire’s holdings in pre-
ferred stock to common, and soon thereafter, he began to acquire even
more. By the end of the year, Berkshire owned 27 million shares. In
March 1995, Buffett added another 20 million shares; in 1997, another
49.5 million; and 50.5 million more in 1998. At the end of 2003, Berk-
shire owned more than 151 million shares of American Express stock,
nearly 12 percent of the company, with a market value of more than $7
billion—seven times what Buffett paid for it.

The Washington Post Company
The Washington Post generates substantial cash f low for its owners, more
than can be reinvested in its primary businesses. So its management is
confronted with two rational choices: Return the money to shareholders
and/or profitably invest the cash in new investment opportunities. As
we know, Buffett prefers to have companies return excess earnings to
shareholders. The Washington Post Company, while Katherine Graham
was president, was the first newspaper company in its industry to repur-
chase shares in large quantities. Between 1975 and 1991, the company
bought an unbelievable 43 percent of its shares at an average price of $60
per share.
    A company can also choose to return money to shareholders by in-
creasing the dividend. In 1990, confronted with substantial cash reserves,
the Washington Post voted to increase the annual dividend to its share-
holders from $1.84 to $4.00, a 117 percent increase (see Figure 6.1).
    In addition to returning excess cash to its owners, the Washington
Post has made several profitable business purchases: cable properties from
Capital Cities, cellular telephone companies, and television stations. Don
Graham, who now runs the company, is continually beset with offers. To
further his goal of developing substantial cash f lows at favorable invest-
ment costs, he has developed specific guidelines for evaluating those
                     I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   93




          Figure 6.1 The Washington Post Company dividend per share.



offers. He looks for a business that “has competitive barriers, does not re-
quire extensive capital expenditures, and has reasonable pricing power.”
Furthermore, he notes, “we have a strong preference for businesses we
know” and given the choice, “we’re more likely to invest in a handful
of big bets rather than spread our investment dollars around thinly.”9
Graham’s acquisition approach mimics Buffett’s strategy at Berkshire
Hathaway.
     The dynamics of the newspaper business have changed in recent
years. Earlier, when the economy slowed and advertisers cut spending,
newspapers could maintain profitability by raising lineage rates. But
today’s advertisers have found cheaper ways to reach their customers:
cable television, direct mail, and newspaper inserts. Newspapers are no
longer monopolies; they have lost their pricing f lexibility.
     Even so, Buffett is convinced that the Post is in better shape than
other media companies. There are two reasons for his optimism. First,
the Post’s long-term debt was more than offset by its cash holdings.
The Washington Post is the only public newspaper that is essentially
free of debt. “As a result,” explains Buffett, “the shrinkage in the value
of their assets has not been accentuated by the effects of leverage.”10
Second, he notes, the Washington Post Company has been exception-
ally well managed.
94    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

The Pampered Chef
Doris Christopher, the founder, chairman and CEO of the Pampered
Chef, has allocated her capital well—financing all expansion and growth
through internal earnings. She has reinvested virtually all her profits
in the company and the resulting expansion has brought tremendous
growth in sales. Between 1995 and 2001, the Pampered Chef ’s business
grew an astonishing 232 percent, with pretax profit margins above 25
percent. And the only debt the company ever had was the original $3,000
seed money that Christopher borrowed from her life insurance policy.
    From all appearances, Doris Christopher is a careful and profitable
manager, and she runs a tight ship. She displays keen management intu-
ition by treating her representatives well but competitively. The Pam-
pered Chef ’s direct marketers across the country are the bread and butter
of the business and the company’s only direct contact with its over 12
million customers. The sales force earns commissions of 18 to 20 percent
on goods they sell, and 1 to 4 percent on the sales of kitchen consultants
whom they bring into the company.

CANDOR

Buffett holds in high regard managers who report their companies’ fi-
nancial performance fully and genuinely, who admit mistakes as well as
share successes, and who are in all ways candid with shareholders. In
particular, he respects managers who are able to communicate the per-
formance of their company without hiding behind Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP).
    Financial accounting standards only require disclosure of business
information classified by industry segment. Some managers exploit this
minimum requirement and lump together all the company’s businesses
into one industry segment, making it difficult for owners to understand
the dynamics of their separate business interests.
    “What needs to be reported,” Buffett insists, “is data—whether
GAAP, non-GAAP, or extra GAAP—that helps the financially literate
readers answer three key questions: (1) Approximately how much is
this company worth? (2) what is the likelihood that it can meet its fu-
ture obligations? and (3) how good a job are its managers doing, given
the hand they have been dealt?”11
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   95

     Berkshire Hathaway’s own annual reports are a good example. They
meet GAAP obligations, but they go much further. Buffett includes the
separate earnings of each of Berkshire’s businesses and any other addi-
tional information that he feels owners would deem valuable when judg-
ing a company’s economic performance. Buffett admires CEOs who are
able to report to their shareholders in the same candid fashion.
     He also admires those with the courage to discuss failure openly.
He believes that managers who confess mistakes publicly are more
likely to correct them. According to Buffett, most annual reports are a
sham. Over time, every company makes mistakes, both large and in-
consequential. Too many managers, he believes, report with excess op-
timism instead of honest explanation, serving perhaps their own
interests in the short term but no one’s interests in the long run.
     Buffett credits Charlie Munger with helping him understand the
value of studying one’s mistakes instead of concentrating only on suc-
cess. In his annual reports to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders, Buffett
is open about Berkshire’s economic and management performance,
both good and bad. Through the years, he has admitted the difficulties
that Berkshire encountered in both the textile and insurance businesses
and his own management failures with these businesses.
     His self-criticism is blunt, and unstinting. The merger with General
Re reinsurance company in 1998 brought significant trouble, a good
deal of which remained undiagnosed for several years, and came to light
only in the wake of the World Trade Center bombing in 2001. At the
time of the merger, Buffett said later, he thought the reinsurance com-
pany operated with the same discipline he demanded of other Berkshire
insurance companies. “I was dead wrong,” he admitted in 2002. “There
was much to do at that company to get it up to snuff.”12
     The General Re problem was not limited to its insurance practices.
The company also had a division that dealt in trading and derivatives, a
business Buffett considered unattractive at the time of the merger (al-
though, as part of the package, unavoidable) and financially disastrous
several years later. In 2003, he wrote this straightforward apology to
shareholders: “I’m sure I could have saved you $100 million or so, if I had
acted more promptly to shut down Gen Re Securities. Charlie would
have moved swiftly to close [it] down—no question about that. I, how-
ever, dithered. As a consequence, our shareholders are paying a far higher
price than was necessary to exit this business.”13
96     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    Critics have argued that Buffett’s practice of publicly admitting his
mistakes is made easier because, since he owns such a large share of
Berkshire’s common stock, he never has to worry about being fired.
This is true. But it does not diminish the fundamental value of Buffett’s
belief that candor benefits the manager at least as much as it benefits the
shareholder. “The CEO who misleads others in public,” he says, “may
eventually mislead himself in private.”14

Coca-Cola
Roberto Goizueta’s strategy for strengthening Coca-Cola when he took
over as CEO pointedly included shareholders. “We shall, during the next
decade, remain totally committed to our shareholders and to the protec-
tion and enhancement of their investment,” he wrote. “In order to give
our shareholders an above-average total return on their investment, we
must choose businesses that generate returns in excess of inf lation.”15
    Goizueta not only had to grow the business, which required capital
investment, he was also obliged to increase shareholder value. By in-
creasing profit margins and return on equity, Coca-Cola was able to in-
crease dividends while simultaneously reducing the dividend payout
ratio. Dividends to shareholders, in the 1980s, were increasing 10 per-
cent per year while the payout ratio was declining from 65 percent to 40
percent. This enabled Coca-Cola to reinvest a greater percentage of the
company’s earnings to help sustain its growth rate without shortchang-
ing shareholders.
    Coca-Cola is undeniably a superior company with an outstanding
historical economic performance record. In the most recent years, how-
ever, that level of growth has moderated. Where some shareholders
might have panicked, Buffett did not. He did not, in fact, do anything;
he didn’t sell even one share. It is a clear testament to his belief in the
company, and a clear illustration of staying true to his principles.


T H E I N S T I T U T I O N A L I M P E R AT I V E

If management stands to gain wisdom and credibility by facing mistakes,
why do so many annual reports trumpet only successes? If allocation of
capital is so simple and logical, why is capital so poorly allocated? The
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   97

answer, Buffett has learned, is an unseen force he calls “the institutional
imperative”—the lemminglike tendency of corporate management to
imitate the behavior of other managers, no matter how silly or irrational
that behavior may be.
     He says it was the most surprising discovery of his business career.
At school, he was taught that experienced managers were honest, intel-
ligent, and automatically made rational business decisions. Once out in
the business world, he learned instead that “rationality frequently wilts
when the institutional imperative comes into play.”16
     Buffett believes that the institutional imperative is responsible for
several serious, but distressingly common, conditions: “(1) [The organi-
zation] resists any change in its current direction; (2) just as work ex-
pands to fill available time, corporate projects or acquisitions will
materialize to soak up available funds; (3) any business craving of the
leader, however foolish, will quickly be supported by detailed rate-of-
return and strategic studies prepared by his troops; and (4) the behavior
of peer companies, whether they are expanding, acquiring, setting ex-
ecutive compensation or whatever, will be mindlessly imitated.”17
     Buffett learned this lesson early. Jack Ringwalt, head of National
Indemnity, which Berkshire acquired in 1967, helped Buffett discover
the destructive power of the imperative. While the majority of insur-
ance companies were writing insurance policies on terms guaranteed to
produce inadequate returns or worse, a loss, Ringwalt stepped away
from the market and refused to write new policies. (For the full story,
refer to Chapter 3.) Buffett recognized the wisdom of Ringwalt’s deci-
sions and followed suit. Today, Berkshire’s insurance companies still
operate on this principle.
     What is behind the institutional imperative that drives so many
businesses? Human nature. Most managers are unwilling to look fool-
ish and expose their company to an embarrassing quarterly loss when
other “lemming” companies are still able to produce quarterly gains,
even though they assuredly are heading into the sea. Shifting direction
is never easy. It is often easier to follow other companies down the same
path toward failure than to alter the direction of the company.
     Admittedly, Buffett and Munger enjoy the same protected position
here as in their freedom to be candid about bad news: They don’t have to
worry about getting fired, and this frees them to make unconventional
decisions. Still, a manager with strong communication skills should be
98    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

able to convince owners to accept a short-term loss in earnings and a
change in the direction of their company if it means superior results over
time. Inability to resist the institutional imperative, Buffett has learned,
often has less to do with the owners of the company than the willingness
of its managers to accept fundamental change.
     Even when managers accept the notion that their company must
radically change or face the possibility of shutting down, carrying out
this plan is too difficult for most managers. Many succumb to the
temptation to buy a new company instead of facing the financial facts of
the current problem.
     Why would they do this? Buffett isolates three factors he feels most
inf luence management’s behavior. First, most managers cannot control
their lust for activity. Such hyperactivity often finds its outlet in busi-
ness takeovers. Second, most managers are constantly comparing the
sales, earnings, and executive compensation of their business with other
companies in and beyond their industry. These comparisons invariably
invite corporate hyperactivity. Lastly, Buffett believes that most man-
agers have an exaggerated sense of their own management capabilities.
     Another common problem is poor allocation skills. As Buffett points
out, CEOs often rise to their position by excelling in other areas of
the company, including administration, engineering, marketing, or pro-
duction. Because they have little experience in allocating capital, most
CEOs instead turn to their staff members, consultants, or investment
bankers. Here the institutional imperative begins to enter the decision-
making process. Buffett points out that if the CEO craves a potential ac-
quisition requiring a 15 percent return on investment to justify the
purchase, it is amazing how smoothly his troops report back to him that
the business can actually achieve 15.1 percent.
     The final justification for the institutional imperative is mindless
imitation. If companies A, B, and C are all doing the same thing, well
then, reasons the CEO of company D, it must be all right for our com-
pany to behave the same way.
     It is not venality or stupidity, Buffett believes, that positions these
companies to fail. Rather, it is the institutional dynamics of the impera-
tive that make it difficult to resist doomed behavior. Speaking before a
group of Notre Dame students, Buffett displayed a list of thirty-seven
failed investment banking firms. All of them, he explained, failed even
though the volume of the New York Stock Exchange had multiplied
                     I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   99

fifteenfold. These firms were headed by hard-working individuals with
very high IQs, all of whom had an intense desire to succeed. Buffett
paused; his eyes scanned the room. “You think about that,” he said
sternly. “How could they get a result like that? I’ll tell you how,” he
said, “mindless imitation of their peers.”18

Coca-Cola
When Goizueta took over Coca-Cola, one of his first moves was to
jettison the unrelated businesses that the previous CEO had developed
and return the company to its core business, selling syrup. It was a
clear demonstration of Coca-Cola’s ability to resist the institutional
imperative.
     Reducing the company to a single-product business was undeniably a
bold move. What made Goizueta’s strategy even more remarkable was
his willingness to take this action at a time when others in the industry
were doing the exact opposite. Several leading beverage companies were
investing their profits in other unrelated businesses. Anheuser-Busch
used the profits from its beer business to invest in theme parks. Brown-
Forman, a producer and distributor of wine and spirits, invested its prof-
its in china, crystal, silver, and luggage businesses, all of them with much
lower returns. Seagram Company, Ltd., a global spirits and wine busi-
ness, bought Universal Studios. Pepsi, Coca-Cola’s chief beverage rival,
bought snack businesses (Frito-Lay) and restaurants including Taco Bell,
Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Pizza Hut.
     Not only did Goizueta’s action focus the company’s attention on its
largest and most important product, but it worked to reallocate the
company’s resources into its most profitable business. Since the eco-
nomic returns of selling syrup far outweighed the economic returns of
the other businesses, the company was now reinvesting its profits in its
highest-returning business.

Clayton Homes
In an industry that is strangled by problems of its own making, Clayton
stands out for its strong management and smart business model.
    Manufactured homes now constitute 15 percent of the total housing
units in the United States. In many respects, their historically negative
100    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

image is disappearing. The homes are becoming more like site-built
homes in size and scope; construction quality has consistently improved;
they are competitive with rentals; they have tax advantages in that own-
ers do not have to own the underlying property; and mortgages are now
supported by other large mortgage companies and government agencies,
such as Fannie Mae.
     Still, since they are considerably less expensive than site-built
homes (2002 average prices: $48,800 compared with $164,217), the
primary market remains consumers toward the lower end of the eco-
nomic range. In 2002, over 22 million Americans lived in manufac-
tured homes, with a median family income of $26,900.19
     Many manufacturers were caught in a self-inf licted double bind in
the 1990s, and many of them failed. One arm of this double bind was
the increasing acceptance and popularity of these homes, which rushed
many in the industry toward overexpansion. The other squeeze factor
was simple greed.
     The homes are sold through retailers that are either independent
dealers representing several manufacturers or company-owned outlets.
Right there, on the same lot, shoppers usually find a financing opera-
tion, often a subsidiary of the manufacturer/retailer. In and of itself,
there is nothing wrong with this; it sounds like, and in fact operates
like, a car dealership. The problem is that it has become endemic in the
industry to push sales to anybody who can sign their name to a sales
agreement, regardless of credit history, based on loans that are destined
to default.
     Selling scads of units creates immediate profits for the retailers and
huge commissions for the salespeople. It also creates enormous economic
problems longer range. It is an unfortunate reality that many homes are
sold to people with fragile economic circumstances, and repossession
rates are high, which reduces the demand for new homes. As unemploy-
ment rates rose in the past few years, so did loan delinquencies. Factor in
the oversupply of inventory from the 1990s, and the tight economic
times that diminished spending across the board, and it adds up to a
sorry state of affairs for the industry as a whole.
     Much of the problem can be traced to the very weak loans that are
so common in the manufactured home business. Why do they all do it?
Because they all do it, and each company fears losing market share if it
does otherwise. That, in a nutshell, is the curse of the institutional
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   101

imperative. Clayton has not been completely immune, but it has
avoided the most egregious faults.
     Most importantly, Clayton compensates its salespeople in a different
way. The commissions of sellers and managers are based not only on the
number of homes sold but also on the quality and performance of the
loans made. Sales staff share the financial burden when loan payments are
missed, and share the revenue when the loan performs well. Take, for ex-
ample, a sales manager who handles the sale and financing of a $24,000
mobile home. If the customer cannot make the payments, Clayton would
typically lose $2,500, and the manager is responsible for up to half the
loss.20 But if the loan performs, the manager shares up to half of that, too.
That puts the burden to avoid weak loans on the sales personnel.
     The methodology paid off: In 2002, “only 2.3 percent of the home-
owners with a Clayton mortgage are 30 days delinquent.”21 That is
roughly half the industry delinquency rate. In the late 1990s, when more
than 80 factories and 4,000 retailers went out of business, Clayton closed
only 31 retailers and did not shut any factories. By 2003, when Buffett
entered the picture, Clayton had emerged from the downturn in the
economy in general and the mobile home industry in particular stronger
and better positioned than any of its competitors.
     Warren Buffett bought Clayton Homes because he saw in Jim
Clayton a hardworking self-starter with strong management skills and a
lot of smarts. Clayton showed not once but twice that he could weather
a downturn in the industry by structuring his business model in a way
that avoided an especially damaging institutional imperative.

The Washington Post Company
Buffett has told us that even third-rate newspapers can earn substantial
profits. Since the market does not require high standards of a paper,
it is up to management to impose its own. And it is management’s high
standards and abilities that can differentiate the business’s returns
when compared with its peer group. In 1973, if Buffett had invested in
Gannett, Knight-Ridder, the New York Times, or Times Mirror the
same $10 million he did in the Post, his investment returns would have
been above average, ref lecting the exceptional economics of the news-
paper business during this period. But the extra $200-$300 million
in market value that the Washington Post gained over its peer group,
102      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett says, “came, in very large part, from the superior nature of the
managerial decisions made by Kay [Katherine Graham] as compared to
those made by managers of most other media companies.”22
    Katherine Graham had the brains to purchase large quantities of the
Post’s stock at bargain prices. She also had the courage, he said, to con-
front the labor unions, reduce expenses, and increase the business value
of the paper. Washington Post shareholders are fortunate that Katherine
Graham positioned the company so favorably.



      In evaluating people, you look for three qualities: integrity,
      intelligence, and energy. If you don’t have the first, the other
      two will kill you.23
                                                WARREN BUFFETT, 1993




WA R R E N B U F F E T T O N M A N A G E M E N T, E T H I C S ,
A N D R AT I O N A L I T Y

In all his communications with Berkshire shareholders, and indeed with
the world at large, Buffett has consistently emphasized his search for
honest and straightforward managers. He believes that not only are
these binding corporate values in today’s world, they are also pivotal is-
sues that determine a company’s ultimate success and profitability in
the long term. Executive compensation, stock options, director inde-
pendence, accounting trickery—these issues strike a very personal chord
with Buffett, and he does not hesitate to let us know how he feels.

CEO Avarice and the Institutional Imperative
In his 2001 letter to shareholders, Buffett wrote, “Charlie and I are dis-
gusted by the situation, so common in the last few years, in which share-
holders have suffered billions in losses while the CEOs, promoters and
other higher-ups who fathered these disasters have walked away with
extraordinary wealth. Indeed, many of these people were urging in-
vestors to buy shares while concurrently dumping their own, sometimes
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   103

using methods that hid their actions. To their shame, these business lead-
ers view shareholders as patsies, not partners. . . . There is no shortage of
egregious conduct in corporate America.”24
     The accounting scandals set off alarm bells across the United States,
especially for anyone who held stock in a company 401(k) plan. Share-
holders started asking questions and wondering if their companies were
managing their affairs honestly and transparently. We all became in-
creasingly aware that there were major problems in the system: CEOs
were getting huge paychecks while using company money for private
jets and ostentatious parties, and directors were often rubber-stamping
whatever decisions management decided to take. It seemed as if not one
CEO could resist the temptation to get in on the enormous salaries and
extravagant lifestyles enjoyed by others. That is the institutional imper-
ative at its most destructive.
     Things have not improved much, according to Buffett. In his 2003
letter to shareholders, he lambasted the seemingly unabated “epidemic of
greed.” He wrote, “Overreaching by CEOs greatly accelerated in the
1990s as compensation packages gained by the most avaricious—a title
for which there was vigorous competition—were promptly replicated
elsewhere. In judging whether Corporate America is serious about re-
forming itself, CEO pay remains the acid test. To date, the results aren’t
encouraging.”25 This from a man who has no stock options and still pays
himself $100,000 a year.

Stock Options
In addition to these lofty salaries, executives of publicly traded com-
panies are customarily rewarded with fixed-price stock options, often
tied to corporate earnings but very seldom tied to the executive’s actual
job performance.
    This goes against the grain for Buffett. When stock options are
passed out indiscriminately, he says, managers with below-average per-
formance are rewarded just as generously as the managers who have had
excellent performance. In Buffett’s mind, even if your team wins the
pennant, you don’t pay a .350 hitter the same as a .150 hitter.
    At Berkshire, Buffett uses a compensation system that rewards man-
agers for performance. The reward is not tied to the size of the enter-
prise, the individual’s age, or Berkshire’s overall profits. Buffett believes
104     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that good unit performance should be rewarded whether Berkshire’s
stock price rises or falls. Instead, executives are compensated based on
their success at meeting performance goals keyed to their area of respon-
sibility. Some managers are rewarded for increasing sales, others for re-
ducing expenses or curtailing capital expenditures. At the end of the
year, Buffett does not hand out stock options—he writes checks. Some
are quite large. Managers can use the cash as they please. Many use it to
purchase Berkshire stock.
     Even when stock options are treated as a legitimate aspect of exec-
utive compensation, Buffett cautions us to watch how they are ac-
counted for on a company’s balance sheet. He believes they should be
considered an expense so that their effect on reported earnings is clear.
This seems so obvious as to be unarguable; sadly, not all companies see
it this way.
     In Buffett’s mind, this is another facet of the ready acceptance of ex-
cessive pay. In his 2003 letter to shareholders, he wrote, “When CEOs
or their representatives meet with compensation committees, too often
one side—the CEO’s—has cared far more than the other about what
bargain is struck. A CEO, for example, will always regard the difference
between receiving options for 100,000 shares or for 500,000 as monu-
mental. To a comp committee, however, the difference may seem unim-
portant—particularly if, as has been the case at most companies, neither
grant will have any effect on reported earnings. Under these conditions,
the negotiation often has a ‘play money’ quality.”26
     Buffett’s strong feelings about this subject can be seen in his re-
sponse to Amazon’s announcement in April 2003 that it would start ex-
pensing stock options. Buffett wrote to CEO Jeff Bezos that it took
“particular courage” and his decision would be “recognized and re-
membered.”27 A week later, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’s
high-yield bonds.

Malfeasant Accounting and Shady Financing Issues
Anyone who was reading a daily newspaper in the second half of 2001
could not help but be aware of the growing tide of corporate wrong-
doing. For months, we all watched with something amounting to horror
as one scandal followed another, involving some of the best-known
names in American industry. All came to be lumped under the umbrella
                    I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   105

term “accounting scandal” because the misdeeds centered on accounting
trickery and because the outside auditors who were supposed to verify
the accounting reports were themselves named as parties to the actions.



    In the long run, of course, trouble awaits managements that
    paper over operating problems with accounting maneuvers.28
          WARREN BUFFETT, 1991 [NOTE THE                    DATE OF THIS REMARK.]




     It’s far broader than accounting, of course; it’s about greed, lies, and
criminal acts. But accounting reports are a good place to look for signs of
trouble. In his 2002 letter to shareholders, Buffett warned investors to be
careful in reading annual reports. “If you’ve been a reader of financial re-
ports in recent years,” he wrote, “you’ve seen a f lood of ‘pro-forma’
earnings statements—tabulations in which managers invariably show
‘earnings’ far in excess of those allowed by their auditors. In these pre-
sentations, the CEO tells his owners ‘don’t count this, don’t count that—
just count what makes earnings fat.’ Often, a forget-all-this-bad-stuff
message is delivered year after year without management so much as
blushing.”29
     Buffett is plainly disgusted by the scandals. “The blatant wrongdoing
that has occurred has betrayed the trust of so many millions of sharehold-
ers.” He blames the heady days of the 1990s, the get-rich-quick period
he calls the Great Bubble, for the deterioration of corporate ethics. “As
stock prices went up,” he says, “the behavioral norms of managers went
down. By the late 90s, CEOs who traveled the high road did not
encounter heavy traffic. Too many have behaved badly, fudging numbers
and drawing obscene pay for mediocre business achievements.”30 And
in too many cases, their companies’ directors, charged with upholding
shareholder interests, failed miserably.

Director Negligence and Corporate Governance
Part of the problem, Buffett suggests, is the shameful tendency of
boards of directors to blithely rubber-stamp whatever senior manage-
ment asks for. It is a question of independence and guts—the degree to
106     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

which directors are willing to honor their fiduciary responsibility at the
risk of displeasing the senior executives. That willingness, or lack of it,
is on display in boardrooms across the country.
    “True independence—meaning the willingness to challenge a
forceful CEO when something is wrong or foolish—is an enormously
valuable trait in a director,” Buffett writes. “It is also rare. The place to
look for it is among high-grade people whose interests are in line with
those of rank and file shareholders.” Buffett illuminates his position by
describing what he looks for in members of the Berkshire Hathaway
board—“very high integrity, business savvy, shareholder orientation
and a genuine interest in the company.”31


C A N W E R E A L LY P U T A VA L U E O N M A N A G E M E N T ?

Buffett would be the first to admit that evaluating managers along his
three dimensions—rationality, candor, and independent thinking—is
more difficult than measuring financial performance, for the simple
reason that human beings are more complex than numbers.
    Indeed, many analysts believe that because measuring human activity
is vague and imprecise, we simply cannot value management with any
degree of confidence, and therefore the exercise is futile. Without a dec-
imal point, they seem to suggest, there is nothing to measure. Others
hold the view that the value of management is fully ref lected in the com-
pany’s performance statistics, including sales, profit margins, and return
on equity, and no other measuring stick is necessary.
    Both opinions have some validity, but neither is strong enough to
outweigh the original premise. The reason for taking the time to eval-
uate management is that it gives you early warning signs of eventual fi-
nancial performance. If you look closely at the words and actions of a
management team, you will find clues that can help you measure the
value of their work long before it shows up in the company’s financial
reports or in the stock pages of your daily newspaper. Doing so will
take some digging on your part, and that may be enough to discourage
the weak of heart or the lazy. That is their loss, and your gain.
    How to go about gathering the necessary information? Buffett offers
a few tips. He suggests reviewing annual reports from a few years back,
paying special attention to what management said then about strategies
for the future. Then compare those plans to today’s results: How fully
                   I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : M a n a g e m e n t Te n e t s   107

were they realized? Also compare strategies of a few years ago to this
year’s strategies and ideas: How has the thinking changed? Buffett also
suggests that it can be very valuable to compare annual reports of the
company you are interested in with reports from similar companies in
the same industry. It is not always easy to find exact duplicates, but even
relative performance comparison can yield insights.


    I read annual reports of the company I’m looking at and I read
    the annual reports of the competitors. That’s the main source
    material.
                                                          WARREN BUFFETT, 1993

    We like to keep things simple, so the chairman can sit around
    and read annual reports.32
                                                         CHARLIE MUNGER, 1993



     Expand your reading horizons. Be alert for articles in newspapers
and financial magazines about the company you are interested in and
about its industry in general. Read what the company’s executives have
to say and what others say about them. If you notice that the chairman
recently made a speech or presentation, get a copy from the investor
relations department and study it carefully. Make use of the company’s
web pages for up-to-the-minute information. In every way you can
think of, raise your antennae. The more you develop the habit of staying
alert for information, the easier the process will become.
     It must be said here, with sadness, that it is possible that the docu-
ments you study are filled with inf lated numbers, half-truths, and de-
liberate obfuscations. We all know the names of the companies charged
with doing this; they are a rogue’s gallery of American businesses, and
some of their leaders are finding themselves with lots of time in prison
to rethink their actions. Sometimes the manipulations are so skillful
that even forensic accountants are fooled; how then can you, an investor
without any special knowledge, fully understand what you are seeing?
     The regrettable answer is, you cannot. You can learn how to read
annual reports and balance sheets—and you should—but if they are
based on f lagrant deception and lies, you might not be able to detect it.
108      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    I do not mean to say that you should simply give up. Keep doing
your research, and strive to be alert for signs of trouble. It should not
surprise us that Warren Buffett gives us some valuable tips:33

      • “Beware of companies displaying weak accounting.” In particu-
        lar, he cautions us to watch out for companies that do not expense
        stock options. It’s an obvious red f lag that other less obvious ma-
        neuvers are also present.
      • Another red f lag: “unintelligible footnotes.” If you can’t under-
        stand them, he says, don’t assume it’s your shortcoming; it’s a fa-
        vored tool for hiding something management doesn’t want you
        to know.
      • “Be suspicious of companies that trumpet earnings projections
        and growth expectations.” No one can know the future, and any
        CEO who claims to do so is not worthy of your trust.

                                        
In conclusion, Buffett wants to work with managers who are straight
shooters, who are candid with their shareholders and their employees.
His unshakable insistence on ethical behavior as a condition of doing
business has taken on added significance since the outbreak of corporate
scandals. However, he would be the first to acknowledge that taking
such a stand will not, in and of itself, insulate investors from losses trig-
gered by fraud.
    I must add my own caution: I cannot promise that following the
tenets of the Warren Buffett Way described in this book will protect
you 100 percent. If company officials are f lat-out lying to investors
through fraudulent accounting or other illegal maneuvers and if they’re
good at it, it can be difficult, often impossible, to detect in time. Even-
tually the perpetrators end up in jail, but by then the damage to share-
holders is done; the money is gone. What I can say is this: If you adopt
the careful, thoughtful way of looking at investments that Buffett
teaches us and take the time to do your homework, you will be right
more often than you are wrong, and certainly more often than those
who allow themselves to be pushed and pulled willy-nilly by headlines
and rumor.
                                   7

          Investing Guidelines
                       Financial Tenets



T
      he financial tenets by which Buffett values both managerial excel-
      lence and economic performance are all grounded in some typi-
      cally Buffett-like principles. For one thing, he does not take yearly
results too seriously. Instead, he focuses on four- or five-year averages.
Often, he notes, profitable business returns might not coincide with the
time it takes for the planet to circle the sun.
     He also has little patience with accounting sleight-of-hand that pro-
duces impressive year-end numbers but little real value. Instead, he re-
lies on a few timeless financial principles:

    •   Focus on return on equity, not earnings per share.
    •   Calculate “owner earnings” to get a true ref lection of value.
    •   Look for companies with high profit margins.
    •   For every dollar retained, has the company created at least a dol-
        lar of market value?


RETURN ON EQUITY

Customarily, analysts measure annual company performance by looking
at earnings per share. Did they increase over the preceding year? Are
they high enough to brag about? For his part, Buffett considers earnings

                                                                       109
110    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

per share a smoke screen. Since most companies retain a portion of their
previous year’s earnings to increase their equity base, he sees no reason
to get excited about record earnings per share. There is nothing spec-
tacular about a company that increases earnings per share by 10 percent
if at the same time it is growing its equity base by 10 percent. That’s no
different, he explains, from putting money in a savings account and let-
ting the interest accumulate and compound.
     The test of economic performance, Buffett believes, is whether a
company achieves a high earnings rate on equity capital (“without undue
leverage, accounting gimmickry, etc.”), not whether it has consistent
gains in earnings per share.1 To measure a company’s annual perfor-
mance, Buffett prefers return on equity—the ratio of operating earnings
to shareholders’ equity.
     To use this ratio, though, we need to make several adjustments. First,
all marketable securities should be valued at cost and not at market value,
because values in the stock market as a whole can greatly inf luence the
returns on shareholders’ equity in a particular company. For example, if
the stock market rose dramatically in one year, thereby increasing the net
worth of a company, a truly outstanding operating performance would
be diminished when compared with a larger denominator. Conversely,
falling prices reduce shareholders’ equity, which means that mediocre
operating results appear much better than they really are.
     Second, we must also control the effects that unusual items may have
on the numerator of this ratio. Buffett excludes all capital gains and
losses as well as any extraordinary items that may increase or decrease
operating earnings. He is seeking to isolate the specific annual perfor-
mance of a business. He wants to know how well management accom-
plishes its task of generating a return on the operations of the business
given the capital it employs. That, he says, is the single best measure of
management’s economic performance.
     Furthermore, Buffett believes that a business should achieve good
returns on equity while employing little or no debt. We know that
companies can increase their return on equity by increasing their debt-
to-equity ratio. Buffett is aware of this, but the idea of adding a couple
of points to Berkshire Hathaway’s return on equity simply by taking on
more debt does not impress him. “Good business or investment deci-
sions,” he says, “will produce quite satisfactory economic results with
no aid from leverage.”2 Furthermore, highly leveraged companies are
vulnerable during economic slowdowns.
                        I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s   111

    Buffett does not give us any suggestions as to what debt levels are ap-
propriate or inappropriate for a business. Different companies, depending
on their cash f lows, can manage different levels of debt. What Buffett
does tell us is that a good business should be able to earn a good return on
equity without the aid of leverage. Investors should be wary of companies
that can earn good returns on equity only by employing significant debt.

Coca-Cola
In “Strategy for the 1980s,” his plan for revitalizing the company,
Goizueta pointed out that Coca-Cola would divest any business that no
longer generated acceptable returns on equity. Any new business ven-
ture must have sufficient real growth potential to justify an investment.
Coca-Cola was no longer interested in battling for share in a stagnant
market. “Increasing earnings per share and effecting increased return
on equity are still the name of the game,” Goizueta announced.3 His
words were followed by actions. Coca-Cola’s wine business was sold to
Seagram’s in 1983.
    Although the company earned a respectable 20 percent return on
equity during the 1970s, Goizueta was not impressed. He demanded
better returns and the company obliged. By 1988, Coca-Cola’s return
on equity had increased to 31.8 percent (see Figure 7.1).




     Figure 7.1 The Coca-Cola Company return on equity and pretax margins.
112    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     By any measurement, Goizueta’s Coca-Cola was doubling and
tripling the financial accomplishments of the previous CEO. The results
could be seen in the market value of the company. In 1980, Coca-Cola
had a market value of $4.1 billion. By the end of 1987, even after the
stock market crash in October, the market value had risen to $14.1 bil-
lion (see Figure 7.2). In seven years, Coca-Cola’s market value rose at an
average annual rate of 19.3 percent.

The Washington Post Company
When Buffett purchased stock in the Washington Post in 1973, its re-
turn on equity was 15.7 percent. This was an average return for most
newspapers and only slightly better than the Standard & Poor’s Indus-
trial Index. But within five years, the Post’s return on equity doubled.
By then, it was twice as high as the S&P Industrials and 50 percent
higher than the average newspaper. Over the next ten years, the Post
Company maintained its supremacy, reaching a high of 36.3 percent re-
turn on equity in 1988.
     These above-average returns are more impressive when you observe
that the company has, over time, purposely reduced its debt. In 1973,
long-term debt to shareholder’s equity stood at 37.2 percent, the second
highest ratio in the newspaper group. Astonishingly, by 1978, Katherine




               Figure 7.2 The Coca-Cola Company market value.
                        I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s   113

Graham had reduced the company’s debt by 70 percent. In 1983, long-
term debt to equity was a low 2.7 percent—one-tenth the newspaper
group average—yet the Post generated a return on equity 10 percent
higher than these same companies.


“OWNER EARNINGS”

Investors, Buffett warns, should be aware that accounting earnings per
share represent the starting point for determining the economic value of
a business, not the ending point. “The first point to understand,” he says,
“is that not all earnings are created equal.”4 Companies with high assets
to profits, he points out, tend to report ersatz earnings. Because inf lation
extracts a toll on asset-heavy businesses, the earnings of these businesses
take on a miragelike quality. Hence, accounting earnings are useful to the
analyst only if they approximate the expected cash f low of the company.
     But even cash f low, Buffett warns, is not a perfect tool for measur-
ing value; often it misleads investors. Cash f low is an appropriate way
to measure businesses that have large investments in the beginning and
smaller outlays later on, such as real estate, gas fields, and cable com-
panies. On the other hand, companies that require ongoing capital ex-
penditures, such as manufacturers, are not accurately valued using only
cash f low.
     A company’s cash f low is customarily defined as net income after
taxes plus depreciation, depletion, amortization, and other noncash
charges. The problem with this definition, Buffett explains, is that it
leaves out a critical economic fact: capital expenditures. How much of
the year’s earnings must the company use for new equipment, plant up-
grades, and other improvements to maintain its economic position and
unit volume? According to Buffett, approximately 95 percent of U.S.
businesses require capital expenditures that are roughly equal to their
depreciation rates. You can defer capital expenditures for a year or so, he
says, but if over a long period, you don’t make the necessary improve-
ments, your business will surely decline. These capital expenditures are
as much an expense to a company as are labor and utility costs.
     Popularity of cash-f low numbers heightened during the leveraged
buyout period of the 1980s because the exorbitant prices paid for busi-
nesses were justified by a company’s cash f low. Buffett believes that
cash-f low numbers “are frequently used by marketers of business and
114    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

securities to justify the unjustifiable and thereby sell what should be un-
salable. When earnings look inadequate to service debt of a junk bond
or justify a foolish stock price, how convenient it becomes to focus on
cash f low.”5 But you cannot focus on cash f low, Buffett cautions, un-
less you are willing to subtract the necessary capital expenditures.
     Instead of cash f low, Buffett prefers to use what he calls “owner
earnings”—a company’s net income plus depreciation, depletion, and
amortization, less the amount of capital expenditures and any addi-
tional working capital that might be needed. It is not a mathematically
precise measure, Buffett admits, for the simple reason that calculating
future capital expenditures often requires rough estimates. Still, quot-
ing Keynes, he says, “I would rather be vaguely right than precisely
wrong.”

Coca-Cola
In 1973, “owner earnings” (net income plus depreciation minus capital
expenditures) were $152 million. By 1980, owner earnings were $262
million, an 8 percent annual compounded growth rate. Then from 1981
through 1988, owner earnings grew from $262 million to $828 million,
a 17.8 percent average annual compounded growth rate (see Figure 7.3).
    The growth in owner earnings is ref lected in the share price of
Coca-Cola. In the ten-year period from 1973 to 1982, the total return
of Coca-Cola grew at a 6.3 percent average annual rate. Over the next
ten years, from 1983 to 1992, the total return grew at an average an-
nual rate of 31.1 percent.


PROFIT MARGINS

Like Philip Fisher, Buffett is aware that great businesses make lousy in-
vestments if management cannot convert sales into profits. In his expe-
rience, managers of high-cost operations tend to find ways that
continually add to overhead, whereas managers of low-cost operations
are always finding ways to cut expenses.
     Buffett has little patience for managers who allow costs to esca-
late. Frequently these same managers have to initiate a restructuring
program to bring down costs in line with sales. Each time a company
                        I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s   115




      Figure 7.3 The Coca-Cola Company net income and “owner earnings.”

announces a cost-cutting program, he knows this company has not fig-
ured out what expenses can do to a company’s owners. “The really
good manager,” Buffett says, “does not wake up in the morning and
say, ‘This is the day I’m going to cut costs,’ any more than he wakes up
and decides to practice breathing.”6
     Buffett understands the right size staff for any business operation
and believes that for every dollar of sales there is an appropriate level of
expenses. He has singled out Carl Reichardt and Paul Hazen at Wells
Fargo for their relentless attack on unnecessary expenses. They “abhor
having a bigger head count than is needed,” he says, “and ‘Attack costs
as vigorously when profits are at record levels as when they are under
pressure.’ ”7
     Buffett himself can be tough when it comes to costs and unnecessary
expenses, and he is very sensitive about Berkshire’s profit margins. Of
course, Berkshire Hathaway is a unique corporation. The corporate staff
at Kiewit Plaza would have difficulty fielding a softball team. Berkshire
Hathaway does not have a legal department, a public or investor rela-
tions department. There are no strategic planning departments staffed
with MBA-trained workers plotting mergers and acquisitions. The
company’s aftertax overhead corporate expense runs less than 1 percent
of operating earnings. Compare this, says Buffett, with other companies
116    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

that have similar earnings but 10 percent corporate expenses; sharehold-
ers lose 9 percent in the value of their holdings simply because of corpo-
rate overhead.

The Pampered Chef
As mentioned, Doris Christopher founded her company with $3,000
borrowed against her family’s life insurance policy and she never took
on further debt. Today her company has over $700 million in sales.
    Customers pay for products before delivery so the company is a cash-
positive business. Alan Luce, president of Luce & Associates in Orlando,
Florida, a direct selling consulting firm, has estimated pretax profit mar-
gins at above 25 percent.

Coca-Cola
In 1980, Coca-Cola’s pretax profit margins were a low 12.9 percent.
Margins had been falling for five straight years and were substantially
below the company’s 1973 margins of 18 percent. In Goizueta’s first
year, pretax margins rose to 13.7 percent; by 1988, when Buffett bought
his Coca-Cola shares, margins had climbed to a record 19 percent.

The Washington Post Company
Six months after the Post Company went public in 1971, Katherine
Graham met with Wall Street security analysts. The first order of busi-
ness, she told them, was to maximize profits from the company’s exist-
ing operations. Profits continued to rise at the television stations and
Newsweek, but profitability at the newspaper was leveling off. The pri-
mary reason, she said, was high production costs, namely wages.
     After the Post purchased the Times-Herald, profits at the company
had surged. Each time the unions struck the paper (1949, 1958, 1966,
1968, 1969), management had opted to pay their demands rather than
risk a shutdown. During this time, Washington, DC, was still a three-
newspaper town. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, increasing wage costs
dampened profits. This problem, Mrs. Graham told the analysts, was
going to be solved.
     As union contracts began to expire in the 1970s, Mrs. Graham en-
listed labor negotiators who took a hard line with the unions. In 1974,
                       I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s   117

the company defeated a strike by the Newspaper Guild and, after lengthy
negotiations, the printers settled on a new contract.
    In the early 1970s, Forbes had written, “The best that could be said
about The Washington Post Company’s performance was it rated a gen-
tleman’s C in profitability.”8 Pretax margins in 1973 were 10.8 per-
cent—well below the company’s historical 15 percent margins earned
in the 1960s. After the successful renegotiation of the union contracts,
the Post’s fortunes improved. By 1978, profit margins had leaped to
19.3 percent—an 80 percent improvement within five years.
    Buffett’s bet had paid off. By 1988, the Post’s pretax margin reached
a high of 31.8 percent, which compared favorably with its newspaper
group average of 16.9 percent and the Standard & Poor’s Industrial aver-
age of 8.6 percent. Although the company’s margins have declined some-
what in recent years, they remain substantially higher than the industry
average.


THE ONE-DOLLAR PREMISE

Buffett’s goal is to select companies in which each dollar of retained
earnings is translated into at least one dollar of market value. This test
can quickly identify companies whose managers, over time, have been
able to optimally invest their company’s capital. If retained earnings are
invested in the company and produce above-average return, the proof
will be a proportionally greater rise in the company’s market value.
     In time, that is. Although the stock market will track business value
reasonably well over long periods, in any one year, prices can gyrate
widely for reasons other than value. The same is true for retained earn-
ings, Buffett explains. If a company uses retained earnings unproduc-
tively over an extended period, eventually the market, justifiably, will
price its shares disappointingly. Conversely, if a company has been able
to achieve above-average returns on augmented capital, the increased
stock price will ref lect that success.
     Buffett believes that if he has selected a company with favorable long-
term economic prospects run by able and shareholder-oriented managers,
the proof will be ref lected in the increased market value of the company.
And he uses a quick test: The increased market value should at the very
least match the amount of retained earnings, dollar for dollar. If the value
                      I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : F i n a n c i a l Te n e t s   119

    As we have learned of one accounting scandal after another, it has
become even more critical for investors to delve into these financial
areas. There is no guarantee that through this effort you will fully un-
cover the truth, but you will have much greater chance of spotting
phony numbers than if you do nothing. As Buffett remarks, “Managers
that always promise to ‘make the numbers’ will at some point make up
the numbers.”10 Your goal is to begin to learn to tell the difference.
                                 8

        Investing Guidelines
                        Value Tenets



A
      ll the principles embodied in the tenets described so far lead to
      one decision point: buying or not buying shares in a company.
      At that point, any investor must weigh two factors: Is this com-
pany a good value, and is this a good time to buy it—that is, is the
price favorable?
    The stock market establishes price. The investor determines value
after weighing all the known information about a company’s business,
management, and financial traits. Price and value are not necessarily
equal. As Warren Buffett often remarks, “Price is what you pay. Value
is what you get.”
    If the stock market were truly efficient, prices would instanta-
neously adjust to all available information. Of course, we know this
does not occur. Stock prices move above and below company values for
numerous reasons, not all of them logical.


    It’s bad to go to bed at night thinking about the price of a
    stock. We think about the value and company results; The
    stock market is there to serve you, not instruct you.1
                                           WARREN BUFFETT, 2003



                                                                   121
122      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    Theoretically, investors make their decisions based on the differ-
ences between price and value. If the price is lower than its per share
value, a rational investor will decide to buy. If the price is higher than
value, any reasonable investor will pass.
    As the company moves through its economic life cycle, a savvy in-
vestor will periodically reassess the company’s value in relation to mar-
ket price and will buy, sell, or hold shares accordingly.
    In sum, then, rational investing has two components:

      1. Determine the value of the business.
      2. Buy only when the price is right—when the business is selling at
         a significant discount to its value.


C A L C U L AT E W H AT T H E B U S I N E S S I S W O RT H

Through the years, financial analysts have used many formulas for de-
termining the intrinsic value of a company. Some are fond of various
shorthand methods: low price-to-earnings ratios, low price-to-book
values, and high dividend yields. But the best system, according to Buf-
fett, was determined more than sixty years ago by John Burr Williams
(see Chapter 2). Buffett and many others use Williams’s dividend dis-
count model, presented in his book The Theory of Investment Value,
as the best way to determine the value of a security.
     Paraphrasing Williams, Buffett tells us that the value of a business is
the total of the net cash f lows (owner earnings) expected to occur over
the life of the business, discounted by an appropriate interest rate. He
considers it simply the most appropriate yardstick with which to mea-
sure a basket of different investment types: government bonds, corpo-
rate bonds, common stocks, apartment buildings, oil wells, and farms.
     The mathematical exercise, Buffett tells us, is similar to valuing a
bond. The bond market each day adds up the future coupons of a
bond and discounts those coupons at the prevailing interest rate; that
determines the value of the bond. To determine the value of a busi-
ness, the investor estimates the “coupons” that the business will gener-
ate for a period into the future and then discounts all these coupons
back to the present. “So valued,” Buffett says, “all businesses, from
                           I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   123
manufacturers of buggy whips to operators of cellular telephones, be-
come economic equals.”2
     To summarize, then, calculating the current value of a business
means, first, estimating the total earnings that will likely occur over the
life of the business; and then discounting that total backward to today.
(Keep in mind that for “earnings” Buffett uses owner earnings—net
cash f low adjusted for capital expenditures, as described in Chapter 7.)
     To estimate the total future earnings, we would apply all we had
learned about the company’s business characteristics, its financial
health, and the quality of its managers, using the analysis principles de-
scribed thus far. For the second part of the formula, we need only de-
cide what the discount rate should be—more on that in a moment.
     Buffett is firm on one point: He looks for companies whose future
earnings are as predictable, as certain, as the earnings of bonds. If the
company has operated with consistent earnings power and if the busi-
ness is simple and understandable, Buffett believes he can determine its
future earnings with a high degree of certainty. If he is unable to proj-
ect with confidence what the future cash f lows of a business will be, he
will not attempt to value the company. He’ll simply pass.



    To properly value a business, you should ideally take all the
    f lows of money that will be distributed between now and judg-
    ment day and discount them at an appropriate discount rate.
    That’s what valuing businesses is all about. Part of the equation
    is how confident you can be about those cash f lows occurring.
    Some businesses are easier to predict than others. We try to
    look at businesses that are predictable.3
                                                       WARREN BUFFETT, 1988



     This is the distinction of Buffett’s approach. Although he admits
that Microsoft is a dynamic company and he regards Bill Gates highly
as a manager, Buffett confesses he hasn’t a clue how to estimate the fu-
ture cash earnings of this company. This is what he means by “the cir-
cle of competence”; he does not know the technology industry well
124    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

enough to project the long-term earnings potential of any company
within it.
     This brings us to the second element in the formula: What is the
appropriate discount rate? Buffett’s answer is simple: the rate that
would be considered risk-free. For many years, he used the rate then
current for long-term government bonds. Because the certainty that the
U.S. government will pay its coupon over the next thirty years is virtu-
ally 100 percent, we can say that this is a risk-free rate.
     When interest rates are low, Buffett adjusts the discount rate up-
ward. When bond yields dipped below 7 percent, Buffett upped his dis-
count rate to 10 percent, and that is what he commonly uses today. If
interest rates work themselves higher over time, he has successfully
matched his discount rate to the long-term rate. If they do not, he has
increased his margin of safety by three additional points.
     Some academicians argue that no company, regardless of its
strengths, can assure future cash earnings with the same certainty as a
bond. Therefore, they insist, a more appropriate discount factor would be
the risk-free rate of return plus an equity risk premium, added to ref lect
the uncertainty of the company’s future cash f lows. Buffett does not add
a risk premium. Instead, he relies on his single-minded focus on com-
panies with consistent and predictable earnings and on the margin of
safety that comes from buying at a substantial discount in the first place.
“I put a heavy weight on certainty,” Buffett says. “If you do that, the
whole idea of a risk factor doesn’t make any sense to me.”4

Coca-Cola
When Buffett first purchased Coca-Cola in 1988, people asked:
“Where is the value in Coke?” Why was Buffett willing to pay five
times book value for a company with a 6.6 percent earning yield? Be-
cause, as he continuously reminds us, price tells us nothing about value,
and he believed Coca-Cola was a good value.
    To begin with, the company was earning 31 percent return on eq-
uity while employing relatively little in capital investment. More im-
portant, Buffett could see the difference that Roberto Goizueta’s
management was making. Because Goizueta was selling off the poor-
performing businesses and reinvesting the proceeds back into the
higher-performing syrup business, Buffett knew the financial returns
                           I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   125

of Coca-Cola were going to improve. In addition, Goizueta was buying
back shares of Coca-Cola in the market, thereby increasing the eco-
nomic value of the business even more. All this went into Buffett’s
value calculation. Let’s walk through the calculation with him.
     In 1988, owner earnings of Coca-Cola equaled $828 million. The
thirty-year U.S. Treasury Bond (the risk-free rate) at that time traded
near a 9 percent yield. So Coca-Cola’s 1988 owner earnings, discounted
by 9 percent, would produce an intrinsic value of $9.2 billion. When
Buffett purchased Coca-Cola, the market value was $14.8 billion, 60
percent higher, which led some observers to think he had overpaid. But
$9.2 billion represents the discounted value of Coca-Cola’s then-
current owner earnings. If Buffett was willing to pay the higher price,
it had to be because he perceived that part of the value of Coca-Cola
was its future growth opportunities.
     When a company is able to grow owner earnings without addi-
tional capital, it is appropriate to discount owner earnings by the differ-
ence between the risk-free rate of return and the expected growth of
owner earnings. Analyzing Coca-Cola, we find that owner earnings
from 1981 through 1988 grew at a 17.8 percent annual rate—faster
than the risk-free rate of return. When this occurs, analysts use a two-
stage discount model. This model is a way of calculating future earnings
when a company has extraordinary growth for a certain number of
years and then a period of constant growth at a slower rate.
     We can use this two-stage process to calculate the 1988 present
value of the company’s future cash f lows (see Table 8.1). First, assume
that starting in 1988, Coca-Cola would be able to grow owner earnings
at 15 percent per year for ten years. This is a reasonable assumption,
since that rate is lower than the company’s previous seven-year average.
By the tenth year, the $828 million owner earnings that we started
with would have increased to $3.349 billion. Let’s further assume that
starting in the eleventh year, growth rate will slow to 5 percent a year.
Using a discount rate of 9 percent (the long-term bond rate at the
time), we can back-calculate the intrinsic value of Coca-Cola in 1988:
$48.377 billion (see Notes section at the end of this book for details of
this calculation).5
     But what happens if we decide to be more conservative, and use
different growth rate assumptions? If we assume that Coca-Cola can
grow owner earnings at 12 percent for ten years followed by 5 percent
126
      Table 8.1 The Coca-Cola Company Discounted Owner Earnings Using a Two-Stage “Dividend” Discount Model (first stage is ten years)
                                                                                                   Year
                                                 1           2          3           4          5            6         7       8        9       10
      Prior year cash flow                      $828      $0,952    $ 1,095      $1,259    $ 1,448        $1,665   $1,915   $2,202   $2,532   $2,912
      Growth rate (add)                          15%         15%        15%         15%        15%           15%      15%      15%      15%      15%
      Cash flow                                 $952      $1,095    $ 1,259      $1,448    $ 1,665        $1,915   $2,202   $2,532   $2,912   $3,349
      Discount factor (multiply)              0.9174      0.8417     0.7722      0.7084     0.6499        0.5963   0.5470   0.5019   0.4604   0.4224
      Discounted value per annum                $873      $ 922     $ 972        $1,026    $ 1,082        $1,142   $1,204   $1,271   $1,341   $1,415
      Sum of present value of cash flows                                                   $11,248
      Residual Value
        Cash flow in year 10                                        $ 3,349
        Growth rate (g) (add)                                            5%
        Cash flow in year 11                                        $ 3,516
        Capitalization rate (k - g)                                      4%
        Value at end of year 10                                     $87,900
        Discount factor at end of year 10 (multiply)                 0.4224
      Present Value of Residual                                                             37,129
      Market Value of Company                                                              $48,377
      Notes: Assumed first-stage growth rate = 15.0%; assumed second-stage growth rate = 5.0%; k = discount rate = 9.0%.
      Dollar amounts are in millions.
                          I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   127

growth, the present value of the company discounted at 9 percent
would be $38.163 billion. At 10 percent growth for ten years and 5
percent thereafter, the value of Coca-Cola would be $32.497 billion.
And if we assume only 5 percent throughout, the company would still
be worth at least $20.7 billion [$828 million divided by (9−5 percent)].

Gillette
Berkshire, as mentioned in Chapter 4, bought $600 million worth of
convertible preferred stock in July 1989. After a 2-for-1 stock split in
February 1991, Berkshire converted its preferred stock and received 12
million common shares, 11 percent of Gillette’s shares outstanding.
    Now that Berkshire owned Gillette common yielding 1.7 percent
versus the convertible preferred yielding 8.75 percent, its investment in
Gillette was no longer a fixed-income security with appreciation po-
tential but a straight equity commitment. If Berkshire were to retain its
common stock, Buffett needed to be convinced that Gillette was a good
investment.
    We already know that Buffett understood the company and that the
company’s long-term prospects were favorable. Gillette’s financial char-
acteristics, including return on equity and pretax margins, were improv-
ing. The ability to increase prices thereby boosting return on equity to
above-average rates signaled the company’s growing economic good-
will. CEO Mockler was purposefully reducing Gillette’s long-term debt
and working hard to increase shareholder value.
    In short, the company met all the prerequisites for purchase. What
remained for Buffett was to determine the company’s value, to assure
that Gillette was not overpriced.
    Gillette’s owner earnings at year-end 1990 were $275 million and
had grown at a 16 percent annual rate since 1987. Although this is too
short a period to fully judge a company’s growth, we can begin to
make certain assumptions. In 1991, Buffett compared Gillette to Coca-
Cola. “Coca-Cola and Gillette are two of the best companies in the
world,” he wrote, “and we expect their earnings to grow at hefty rates
in the years ahead.”6
    In early 1991, the thirty-year U.S. government bond was trading at
an 8.62 percent yield. To be conservative, we can use a 9 percent dis-
count rate to value Gillette. But like Coca-Cola, Gillette’s potential
128    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

growth of earnings exceeds the discount rate, so again we must use the
two-stage discount model. If we assume a 15 percent annual growth for
ten years and 5 percent growth thereafter, discounting Gillette’s 1990
owner earnings at 9 percent, the approximate value of Gillette is $16
billion. If we adjust the future growth rate downward to 12 percent,
the value is approximately $12.6 billion; at 10 percent growth, the
value would be $10.8 billion. At a very conservative 7 percent growth
in owner earnings, the value of Gillette is at least $8.5 billion.

The Washington Post Company
In 1973, the total market value for the Washington Post was $80 million.
Yet Buffett claims that “most security analysts, media brokers, and media
executives would have estimated WPC’s intrinsic value at $400 to $500
million.”7 How did Buffett arrive at that estimate? Let us walk through
the numbers, using Buffett’s reasoning.
     We’ll start by calculating owner earnings for that year: Net income
($13.3 million) plus depreciation and amortization ($3.7 million) minus
capital expenditures ($6.6 million) yields 1973 owner earnings of $10.4
million. If we divide these earnings by the long-term U.S. government
bond yield at the time (6.81 percent), the value of the Washington Post
reaches $150 million, almost twice the market value of the company but
well short of Buffett’s estimate.
     Buffett tells us that, over time, the capital expenditures of a news-
paper will equal depreciation and amortization charges, and therefore
net income should approximate owner earnings. Knowing this, we can
simply divide net income by the risk-free rate and thus reach a valuation
of $196 million.
     If we stop here, the assumption is that the increase in owner earn-
ings will equal the rise in inf lation. But we know that newspapers have
unusual pricing power: Because most are monopolies in their commu-
nity, they can raise their prices at rates higher than inf lation. If we
make one last assumption—that the Washington Post has the ability to
raise real prices by 3 percent—the value of the company is closer to
$350 million. Buffett also knew that the company’s 10 percent pretax
margins were below its 15 percent historical average margins, and he
knew that Katherine Graham was determined that the Post would once
                           I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   129

again achieve these margins. If pretax margins improved to 15 percent,
the present value of the company would increase by $135 million,
bringing the total intrinsic value to $485 million.

Wells Fargo
The value of a bank is the function of its net worth plus its projected
earnings as a going concern. When Berkshire Hathaway began purchas-
ing Wells Fargo in 1990, the company in the previous year had earned
$600 million. The average yield on the thirty-year U.S. government
bond that year was approximately 8.5 percent. To remain conservative,
we can discount Wells Fargo’s 1989 $600 million earnings by 9 percent
and value the bank at $6.6 billion. If the bank never earned another
dime over $600 million a year for the next thirty years, it was worth at
least $6.6 billion. When Buffett purchased Wells Fargo in 1990, he paid
$58 per share for its stock. With 52 million shares outstanding, this was
equivalent to paying $3 billion for the company—a 55 percent discount
to its value.
     The debate in investment circles at the time centered on whether
Wells Fargo, after taking into consideration all its loan problems, even
had earnings power. The short sellers said it no; Buffett said yes. He
knew full well that ownership of Wells Fargo carried some risk, but he
felt confident in his analysis. His step-by-step thinking is a good model
for everyone weighing the risk factor of an investment.
     He started with what he already knew. Carl Reichardt, then chair-
man of Wells Fargo, had run the bank since 1983, with impressive re-
sults. Under his leadership, growth in earnings and return on equity
were both above average and operating efficiencies were among the
highest in the country. Reichardt had also built a solid loan portfolio.
     Next, Buffett envisioned the events that would endanger the in-
vestment and came up with three possibilities, then tried to imagine
the likelihood that they would occur. It is, in a real sense, an exercise in
probabilities.
     The first possible risk was a major earthquake, which would
“wreak havoc” on borrowers and in turn on their lenders. The second
risk was broader: a “systemic business contraction or financial panic so
severe it would endanger almost every highly leveraged institution, no
130     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

matter how intelligently run.” Neither of those two could be ruled out
entirely, of course, but Buffett concluded, based on best evidence, that
the probability of either one was low.
     The third risk, and the one getting the most attention from the
market at the time, was that real estate values in the West would tumble
because of overbuilding and “deliver huge losses to banks that have fi-
nanced the expansion.”8 How serious would that be?
     Buffett reasoned that a meaningful drop in real estate values should
not cause major problems for a well-managed bank like Wells Fargo.
“Consider some mathematics,” he explained. Buffett knew that Wells
Fargo earned $1 billion pretax annually after expensing an average
$300 million for loan losses. He figured if 10 percent of the bank’s $48
billion in loans—not just commercial real estate loans but all the bank’s
loans—were problem loans in 1991 and produced losses, including in-
terest, averaging 30 percent of the principal value of the loan, Wells
Fargo would still break even.
     In Buffett’s judgment, the possibility of this occurring was low. But
even if Wells Fargo earned no money for a year, but merely broke even,
Buffett would not f linch. “A year like that—which we consider only a
low-level possibility, not a likelihood—would not distress us.”9
     The attraction of Wells Fargo intensified when Buffett was able to
purchase shares at a 50 percent discount to their value. His bet paid off.
By the end of 1993, Wells Fargo’s share price reached $137 per share,
nearly triple what Buffett originally paid.


B U Y AT AT T R A C T I V E P R I C E S

Focusing on businesses that are understandable, with enduring eco-
nomics, run by shareholder-oriented managers—all those characteris-
tics are important, Buffett says, but by themselves will not guarantee
investment success. For that, he first has to buy at sensible prices, and
then the company has to perform to his business expectations. The sec-
ond is not always easy to control, but the first is: If the price isn’t satis-
factory, he passes.
     Buffett’s basic goal is to identify businesses that earn above-average
returns, and then to purchase these businesses at prices below their
                            I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   131

indicated value. Graham taught Buffett the importance of buying a
stock only when the difference between its price and its value represents
a margin of safety. Today, this is still his guiding principle, even though
his partner Charlie Munger has encouraged him toward occasionally
paying more for outstanding companies.



    Great investment opportunities come around when excellent
    companies are surrounded by unusual circumstances that cause
    the stock to be misappraised.10
                                                        WARREN BUFFETT, 1988



    The margin-of-safety principle assists Buffett in two ways. First, it
protects him from downside price risk. If he calculates that the value of
a business is only slightly higher than its per share price, he will not buy
the stock. He reasons that if the company’s intrinsic value were to dip
even slightly, eventually the stock price would also drop, perhaps below
what he paid for it. But when the margin between price and value is
large enough, the risk of declining value is less. If Buffett is able to pur-
chase a company at 75 percent of its intrinsic value (a 25 percent dis-
count) and the value subsequently declines by 10 percent, his original
purchase price will still yield an adequate return.
    The margin of safety also provides opportunities for extraordinary
stock returns. If Buffett correctly identifies a company with above-
average economic returns, the value of its stock over the long term will
steadily march upward. If a company consistently earns 15 percent on
equity, its share price will appreciate more each year than that of a com-
pany that earns 10 percent on equity. Additionally, if Buffett, by using
the margin of safety, is able to buy this outstanding business at a signifi-
cant discount to its intrinsic value, Berkshire will earn an extra bonus
when the market corrects the price of the business. “The market, like the
Lord, helps those who help themselves,” says Buffett. “But unlike the
Lord, the market does not forgive those who know not what they do.”11
                                                                 ( Text continues on page 134.)
                             CASE IN POINT
                           LARSON-JUHL, 2001

      Late in 2001, Warren Buffett made a handshake deal to buy
      Larson-Juhl, wholesale supplier of custom picture-framing
      materials, for $223 million in cash. It was Buffett’s favorite
      scenario: a solid company, with good economics, strong man-
      agement, and an excellent reputation in its industry, but expe-
      riencing a short-term slump that created an attractive price.
           The business was owned 100 percent by Craig Ponzio, a
      talented designer with an equal talent for business. While in
      college, he worked for one of the manufacturing facilities of
      Larson Picture Frame, then ended up buying the company in
      1981. Seven years later, he bought competitor Juhl-Pacific, cre-
      ating the company now known as Larson-Juhl. When Ponzio
      bought Larson in 1981, its annual sales were $3 million; in
      2001, Larson-Juhl’s sales were more than $300 million.
           That is the kind of performance that Buffett admires.
           He also admires the company’s operating structure. Larson-
      Juhl manufactures and sells the materials that custom framing
      shops use: fancy moldings for frames, matboard, glass, and as-
      sorted hardware. The local shops display samples of all the
      frame moldings available, but keep almost none of it in inven-
      tory. When a customer picks out a frame style, the shop must
      order the molding stock. And this is where Larson-Juhl shines.
      Through its network of twenty-three manufacturing and dis-
      tribution facilities scattered across the United States, it is able
      to fill orders in record time. In the great majority of cases—in-
      dustry analysts say as much as 95 percent of the time—materi-
      als are received the next day.
           With that extraordinary level of service, very few shops are
      going to change suppliers, even if the prices are higher. And
      that gives Larson-Juhl what Buffett calls a moat—a clear and
      sustainable edge over competitors.




132
     Further strengthening that moat, Larson-Juhl is widely
known as the class act in molding. Frame shop operators order
molding material in one-foot increments, and then cut it to the
exact size needed for the customer’s project. If the molding
splits or does not cut cleanly, they cannot achieve the tight cor-
ners that they pride themselves on. Larson-Juhl molding, they
say, makes perfect corners every time. That reputation for
quality has made Larson-Juhl not only the largest but also the
most prestigious company in its industry.
     Larson-Juhl sells thousands of framing styles and finishes to
its more than 18,000 customers. The leading supplier in the
United States, it also operates thirty-three facilities in Europe,
Asia, and Australia.
     In sum, Larson-Juhl has many of the qualities Buffett looks
for. The business is simple and understandable, and the com-
pany has a long and consistent history; one of the original com-
ponent companies dates back 100 years. It also has a predictable
future, with favorable long-term prospects. The ingredients of
custom framing—molding, glass, mats—are not likely to be
made obsolete by changes in technology, nor is customer de-
mand for special treatment of favorite art likely to disappear.
     What piqued Buffett’s interest at this particular time, how-
ever, was the opportunity to acquire the company at an attrac-
tive price, triggered by a dip in profitability that he believed
was temporary.
     In fiscal 2001 (which ended in August), Larson-Juhl had
$314 million in net sales and $30.8 million in cash from opera-
tions. That was down somewhat from prior years: $361 million
sales and $39.1 million cash in 2000; $386 million in sales in
1999. Knowing Buffett’s general approach to calculating value,
we can make a good guess at his financial analysis of Larson-
Juhl. Using his standard 10 percent dividend discount rate, ad-
justed for a very reasonable 3 percent growth rate, the company
would have had a value of $440 million in 2001 ($30.8 million
                                                      (Continued)



                                                                     133
134      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY


      divided by [10 minus 3 percent]). So the $223 million purchase
      price represented a very good value. Also, Buffett was con-
      vinced the fundamental economics of the company were sound,
      and that the lower numbers were a short-term response to the
      depressed economy at the time.
           As is so often the case, Larson-Juhl approached Berkshire,
      not the other way around. Buffett describes the conversation:
      “Though I had never heard of Larson-Juhl before Craig’s call, a
      few minutes talk with him made me think we would strike a
      deal. He was straightforward in describing the business, cared
      about who bought it, and was realistic as to price. Two days
      later, Craig and Steve McKenzie, his CEO, came to Omaha and
      in ninety minutes we reached an agreement.”12 From first con-
      tact to signed contract, the deal took just twelve days.



Coca-Cola
From the time that Roberto Goizueta took control of Coca-Cola in
1980, the company’s stock price had increased every year. In the five
years before Buffett purchased his first shares, the price increased an av-
erage of 18 percent every year. The company’s fortunes were so good
that Buffett was unable to purchase any shares at distressed prices. Still,
he charged ahead. Price, he reminds us, has nothing to do with value.
    In June 1988, the price of Coca-Cola was approximately $10 per
share (split-adjusted). Over the next ten months, Buffett acquired
93,400,000 shares, at an average price of $10.96—fifteen times earnings,
twelve times cash f low, and five times book value. He was willing to do
that because of Coke’s extraordinary level of economic goodwill, and be-
cause he believed the company’s intrinsic value was much higher.
    The stock market’s value of Coca-Cola in 1988 and 1989, during
Buffett’s purchase period, averaged $15.1 billion. But Buffett was con-
vinced its intrinsic value was higher—$20 billion (assuming 5 percent
growth), $32 billion (assuming 10 percent growth), $38 billion (at 12
percent growth), perhaps even $48 billion (if 15 percent growth). There-
fore Buffett’s margin of safety—the discount to intrinsic value—could
be as low as a conservative 27 percent or as high as 70 percent. At the
                            I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   135

same time, his conviction about the company had not changed: The
probabilities of Coca-Cola’s share price beating the market rate of return
were going up, up, and up (see Figure 8.1)
     So what did Buffett do? Between 1988 and 1989, Berkshire Hath-
away purchased more than $1 billion of Coca-Cola stock, representing
35 percent of Berkshire’s common stock portfolio. It was a bold move.
It was Buffett acting on one of his guiding principles: When the proba-
bilities of success are very high, make a big bet.

Gillette
From 1984 through 1990, the average annual gain in Gillette’s share
was 27 percent. In 1989, the share price gained 48 percent and in 1990,
the year before Berkshire converted its preferred stock to common,
Gillette’s share price rose 28 percent (see Figure 8.2). In February
1991, Gillette’s share price reached $73 per share (presplit), then a
record high. At that time, the company had 97 million shares outstand-
ing. When Berkshire converted, total shares increased to 109 million.
Gillette’s stock market value was $8.03 billion.
    Depending on your growth assumptions for Gillette, at the time of
conversion the market price for the company was at a 50 percent discount




Figure 8.1 Common stock price of the Coca-Cola Company compared to the S&P 500
Index (indexed to $100 at start date).
136     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY




Figure 8.2 Common stock price of the Gillette Company compared to the S&P 500
Index (indexed to $100 at start date).
to value (15 percent growth in owner earnings), a 37 percent discount
(12 percent growth), or a 25 percent discount (10 percent growth).

The Washington Post Company
Even the most conservative calculation of value indicates that Buffett
bought the Washington Post Company for at least half of its intrinsic
value. He maintains that he bought the company at less than one-
quarter of its value. Either way, Buffett satisfied Ben Graham’s premise
that buying at a discount creates a margin of safety.

The Pampered Chef
It is reported that Buffett bought a majority stake in the Pampered Chef
for somewhere between $800,000 and $900,000. With pretax margins
of 20 to 25 percent, this means that the Pampered Chef was bought at a
multiple of 4.3 times to 5 times pretax income and 6.5 times to 7.5
times net income, assuming full taxable earnings.
     With revenue growth of 25 percent or above and net income that
converts into cash at anywhere from a high fraction of earnings to a
multiple of earnings, and with a very high return on capital, there is no
doubt that the Pampered Chef was purchased at a significant discount.
                                                       ( Text continues on page 138.)
                       CASE IN POINT
                 FRUIT   OF THE   LOOM, 2002

In 2001, while Fruit of the Loom was operating under the su-
pervision of the bankruptcy court, Berkshire Hathaway offered
to purchase the apparel part of the company (its core business)
for $835 million in cash. As part of its bankruptcy agreement,
Fruit of the Loom was required to conduct an auction for com-
petitive offers. In January 2002, the court announced that Berk-
shire was the successful bidder, with the proceeds of the sale to
go to creditors.
     At the time of Berkshire’s offer, Fruit of the Loom had a
total debt of about $1.6 billion—$1.2 billion to secured lenders
and bondholders and $400 million to unsecured bondholders.
Under the terms of the agreement, secured creditors received
an estimated 73 cents on the dollar for their claims, unsecured
creditors about 10 cents.
     Just before filing for bankruptcy in 1999, the company had
$2.35 billion in assets, then lost money during reorganization.
As of October 31, 2000, assets were $2.02 billion.
     So, in simplified terms, Buffett bought a company with $2
billion in assets for $835 million, which went to pay the out-
standing debt of $1.6 billion.
     But there was a nice kicker. Soon after Fruit of the Loom
went bankrupt, Berkshire bought its debt ( both bonds and bank
loans) for about 50 percent of face value. Throughout the bank-
ruptcy period, interest payments on senior debt continued, earn-
ing Berkshire a return of about 15 percent. In effect, Buffett had
bought a company that owed him money, and repaid it. As
Buffett explained it, “Our holdings grew to 10 percent of Fruit’s
senior debt, which will probably end up returning us about
70 percent of face value. Through this investment, we indirectly
reduced our purchase price for the whole company by a small
amount.”13
                                                      (Continued)


                                                                     137
138      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY


          Warren Buffett is one of the few people who could charac-
      terize $105 million as a “small amount,” but, in fact, after tak-
      ing into account these interest payments, the net purchase price
      for the company was $730 million.
          At the time Berkshire’s offer was being reviewed by the
      bankruptcy court, a reporter for the Omaha World-Herald
      asked Travis Pascavis, a Morningstar analyst, about the deal. He
      noted that companies like Fruit of the Loom usually sell for
      their book value, which in this case would have been $1.4 bil-
      lion. So with a bid of $835 million (ultimately, $730 million),
      Berkshire would be getting the company for a bargain price.14



Clayton Homes
Berkshire’s purchase of Clayton was not all smooth sailing; a legal bat-
tle erupted over the selling price.
     At $12.50 per share, Buffett’s April 2003 offer for Clayton was at
the low end of the $11.49 to $15.58 range that bankers had assigned to
the shares a month earlier. Clayton management argued that the deal
was fair considering the industry’s slump at the time. But Clayton
shareholders mounted a battle in the courts, saying that Berkshire’s offer
was far below the real value of Clayton’s shares. James J. Dorr, general
counsel for Orbis Investment Management Ltd., which voted its 5.4
percent stake against the merger, grumbled, “The fact that it’s Warren
Buffett who wants to buy from you should tell you that you shouldn’t
sell, at least not at his price.”15 For a value investor, that is probably a
very high compliment.
     Warren Buffett defended his offer. At the time of the shareholder
vote, he wrote, “the mobile home business was in bad shape and com-
panies such as Clayton, which needs at least $1 billion of financing
each year and faces declining sales, would continue to have a hard time
finding funds.” Clayton’s board apparently agreed. Then, as evidence
of his commitment to Clayton, Buffett added that he had advanced
the company $360 million of financing since his offer.16 Buffett and
Clayton management ended up winning the shareholder battle by a
narrow margin.
                          I n v e s t i n g G u i d e l i n e s : V a l u e Te n e t s   139

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Warren Buffett has said more than once that investing in stocks is really
simple: Find great companies that are run by honest and competent
people and are selling for less than they are intrinsically worth. No
doubt many who have heard and read that remark over the years have
thought to themselves, “Sure, simple if you’re Warren Buffett. Not so
simple for me.”
     Both sentiments are true. Finding those great companies takes time
and effort, and that is never easy. But the next step—determining their
real value so you can decide whether the price is right—is a simple mat-
ter of plugging in the right variables. And that is where the investment
tenets described in these chapters will serve you well:

    • The business tenets will keep you focused on companies that are
      relatively predictable. If you stick to those with a consistent op-
      erating history and favorable prospects, producing basically the
      same products for the same markets, you will develop a sense of
      how they will do in the future. The same is true if you concen-
      trate on businesses that you understand; if not, you won’t be able
      to interpret the impact of new developments.
    • The management tenets will keep you focused on companies that
      are well run. Excellent managers can make all the difference in a
      company’s future success.
    • Together, the business and management tenets will give a good
      sense of the company’s future earnings potential.
    • The financial tenets will reveal the numbers you need to make a
      determination of the company’s real value.
    • The value tenets will take you through the mathematics neces-
      sary to come up with a final answer: Based on everything you
      have learned, is this a good buy?

    The two value tenets are crucial. But don’t worry too much if you
are unable to address the other ten fully. Don’t let yourself become par-
alyzed by too much information. Do the best you can, get started, and
keep moving forward.
                                   9

          Investing in
    Fixed-Income Securities


W
         arren Buffett is perhaps best known in the investment world
         for his decisions in common stocks, and he is famous for his
         “buy and hold” positions in companies such as Coca-Cola,
American Express, the Washington Post, and Gillette. His activities are
not, however, limited to stocks. He also buys short-term and long-term
fixed-income securities, a category that includes cash, bonds, and pre-
ferred stocks. In fact, fixed-income investing is one of Buffett’s regular
outlets, provided—as always—that there are undervalued opportuni-
ties. He simply seeks out, at any given time, those investments that
provide the highest aftertax return. In recent years, this has included
forays into the debt market, including corporate and government
bonds, convertible bonds, convertible preferred stock, and even high-
yielding junk bonds.
     When we look inside these fixed-income transactions, what we see
looks familiar, for Buffett has displayed the same approach that he takes
with investments in stocks. He looks for margin of safety, commitment,
and low prices ( bargains). He insists on strong and honest management,
good allocation of capital, and a potential for profit. His decisions do
not depend on hot trends or market-timing factors but instead are savvy
investments based on specific opportunities where Buffett believes there
are undervalued assets or securities.

                                                                      141
142     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     This aspect of Buffett’s investing style doesn’t receive a great deal of
attention in the financial press, but it is a critical part of the overall Berk-
shire portfolio. Fixed-income securities represented 20 percent of Berk-
shire’s investment portfolio in 1992; today, 14 years later, that percentage
has grown to about 30 percent.
     The reason for adding these fixed-income investments is simple:
They were the best value at the time. Because of the absolute growth of
the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio and the changing investment environ-
ment, including a lack of publicly traded stocks that he finds attractive,
Buffett has often turned to buying entire companies and to acquiring
fixed-income securities. He wrote in his 2003 letter to shareholders that
it was hard to find significantly undervalued stocks, “a difficulty greatly
accentuated by the mushrooming of the funds we must deploy.”
     In that same 2003 letter, Buffett explained that Berkshire would
continue the capital allocation practices it had used in the past: “If stocks
become cheaper than entire businesses, then we will buy them aggres-
sively. If selected bonds become attractive, as they did in 2002, we will
again load up on these securities. Under any market or economic condi-
tions we will be happy to buy businesses that meet our standards. And,
for those that do, the bigger, the better. Our capital is underutilized
now. It is a painful condition to be in but not as painful as doing some-
thing stupid. (I speak from experience.)”1
     To some extent, fixed-income investments will always be necessary
for Berkshire Hathaway’s portfolio because of Berkshire’s concentration
in insurance companies. To fulfill their obligation to policyholders,
insurance companies must invest some of their assets in fixed-income
securities. Still, Berkshire holds a significantly smaller percentage of
fixed-income securities in its insurance investment portfolio compared
with other insurance companies.
     Generally speaking, Buffett has tended to avoid fixed-income invest-
ments (outside what was needed for the insurance portfolios) whenever
he feared impending inf lation, which would erode the future purchasing
power of money and therefore the value of bonds. Even though interest
rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s approximated the returns of most
businesses, Buffett was not a net purchaser of long-term bonds. There al-
ways existed, in his mind, the possibility of runaway inf lation. In that
kind of environment, common stocks would have lost real value, but
                         Investing in Fixed-Income Securities          143

bonds outstanding would have suffered far greater losses. An insurance
company heavily invested in bonds in a hyperinf lationary environment
has the potential to wipe out its portfolio.
    Even though thinking of Buffett and bonds in the same sentence may
be a new idea for you, it will come as no surprise that he applies the same
principles as he does in valuing a company or stocks. He is a principle-
based investor who will put his money in a deal where he sees a potential
for profit, and he makes sure that the risk is priced into the deal. Even in
fixed-income transactions, his business owner’s perspective means that
he pays close attention to the issuing company’s management, values, and
performance. This “bond-as-a-business” approach to fixed-income in-
vesting is highly unusual but it has served Buffett well.



BONDS

Washington Public Power Supply System
Back in 1983, Buffett decided to invest in some bonds of the Washing-
ton Public Power Supply System (WPPSS). The transaction is a clear
example of Buffett’s thinking in terms of the possible gains from buy-
ing the bonds compared with those if he bought the entire company.
     On July 25, 1983, WPPSS (pronounced, with macabre humor,
“Whoops”) announced that it was in default of $2.25 billion in munic-
ipal bonds used to finance the uncompleted construction of two nuclear
reactors, known as Projects 4 and 5. The state ruled that the local power
authorities were not obligated to pay WPPSS for power they had previ-
ously promised to buy but ultimately did not require. That decision led
to the largest municipal bond default in U.S. history. The size of the
default and the debacle that followed depressed the market for public
power bonds for several years. Investors moved quickly to sell their util-
ity bonds, forcing prices lower and current yields higher.
     The cloud over WPPSS Projects 4 and 5 cast a shadow over Projects
1, 2, and 3. But Buffett perceived significant differences between the
terms and obligations of Projects 4 and 5 on the one hand and those of
Projects 1, 2, and 3 on the other. The first three were operational util-
ities that were also direct obligations of Bonneville Power Administration,
144    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

a government agency. However, the problems of Projects 4 and 5 were
so severe that some were predicting they could weaken the credit posi-
tion of Bonneville Power.
     Buffett evaluated the risks of owning municipal bonds of WPPSS
Projects 1, 2, and 3. Certainly there was a risk that these bonds could
default and a risk that the interest payments could be suspended for a
prolonged period. Still another factor was the upside ceiling on what
these bonds could ever be worth. Even though he could purchase these
bonds at a discount to their par value, at the time of maturity they
could only be worth one hundred cents on the dollar.
     Shortly after Projects 4 and 5 defaulted, Standard & Poor’s suspended
its ratings on Projects 1, 2, and 3. The lowest coupon bonds of Projects 1,
2, and 3 sank to forty cents on the dollar and produced a current yield of
15 to 17 percent tax-free. The highest coupon bonds fell to eighty cents
on the dollar and generated a similar yield. Undismayed, from October
1983 through June the following year, Buffett aggressively purchased
bonds issued by WPPSS for Projects 1, 2, and 3. By the end of June
1984, Berkshire Hathaway owned $139 million of WPPSS Project 1, 2,
and 3 bonds ( both low-coupon and high-coupon) with a face value of
$205 million.
     With WPPSS, explains Buffett, Berkshire acquired a $139 million
business that could expect to earn $22.7 million annually after tax (the
cumulative value of WPPSS annual coupons) and would pay those earn-
ings to Berkshire in cash. Buffett points out there were few businesses
available for purchase during this time that were selling at a discount to
book value and earning 16.3 percent after tax on unleveraged capital.
Buffett figured that if he set out to purchase an unleveraged operating
company earning $22.7 million after tax ($45 million pretax), it would
have cost Berkshire between $250 and $300 million—assuming he could
find one. Given a strong business that he understands and likes, Buffett
would have happily paid that amount. But, he points out, Berkshire paid
half that price for WPPSS bonds to realize the same amount of earnings.
Furthermore, Berkshire purchased the business (the bonds) at a 32 per-
cent discount to book value.
     Looking back, Buffett admits that the purchase of WPPSS bonds
turned out better than he expected. Indeed, the bonds outperformed
most business acquisitions made in 1983. Buffett has since sold the
WPPSS low-coupon bonds. These bonds, which he purchased at a
                         Investing in Fixed-Income Securities         145

significant discount to par value, doubled in price while annually pay-
ing Berkshire a return of 15 to 17 percent tax-free. “Our WPPSS ex-
perience, though pleasant, does nothing to alter our negative opinion
about long-term bonds,” said Buffett. “It only makes us hope that we
run into some other large stigmatized issue, whose troubles have caused
it to be significantly misappraised by the market.”2

RJR Nabisco
Later in the 1980s, a new investment vehicle was introduced to the fi-
nancial markets. The formal name is high-yield bond, but most in-
vestors, then and now, call them junk bonds.
     In Buffett’s view, these new high-yield bonds were different from
their predecessor “fallen angels”—Buffett’s term for investment-grade
bonds that, having fallen on bad times, were downgraded by ratings
agencies. The WPPSS bonds were fallen angels. He described the new
high-yield bonds as a bastardized form of the fallen angels and, he said,
were junk before they were issued.
     Wall Street’s securities salespeople were able to promote the legiti-
macy of junk bond investing by quoting earlier research that indicated
higher interest rates compensated investors for the risk of default. Buf-
fett argued that earlier default statistics were meaningless since they
were based on a group of bonds that differed significantly from the junk
bonds currently being issued. It was illogical, he said, to assume that
junk bonds were identical to the fallen angels. “That was an error sim-
ilar to checking the historical death rate from Kool-Aid before drink-
ing the version served at Jonestown.”3
     As the 1980s unfolded, high-yield bonds became junkier as new of-
ferings f looded the market. “Mountains of junk bonds,” noted Buffett,
“were sold by those who didn’t care to those that didn’t think and there
was no shortage of either.”4 At the height of this debt mania, Buffett
predicted that certain capital enterprises were guaranteed to fail when it
became apparent that debt-laden companies were struggling to meet
their interest payments. In 1989, Southmark Corporation and Inte-
grated Resources both defaulted on their bonds. Even Campeau Corpo-
ration, a U.S. retailing empire created with junk bonds, announced it
was having difficulty meeting its debt obligations. Then on October 13,
1989, UAL Corporation, the target of a $6.8 billion management-union
146     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

led buyout that was to be financed with high-yield bonds, announced
that it was unable to obtain financing. Arbitrageurs sold their UAL com-
mon stock position, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 190
points in one day.
     The disappointment over the UAL deal, coupled with the losses in
Southmark and Integrated Resources, led many investors to question
the value of high-yield bonds. Portfolio managers began dumping
their junk bond positions. Without any buyers, the price for high-
yield bonds plummeted. After beginning the year with outstanding
gains, Merrill Lynch’s index of high-yield bonds returned a paltry 4.2
percent compared with the 14.2 percent returns of investment-grade
bonds. By the end of 1989, junk bonds were deeply out of favor with
the market.
     A year earlier, Kohlberg Kravis & Roberts had succeeded in pur-
chasing RJR Nabisco for $25 billion financed principally with bank
debt and junk bonds. Although RJR Nabisco was meeting its financial
obligations, when the junk bond market unraveled, RJR bonds de-
clined along with other junk bonds. In 1989 and 1990, during the junk
bond bear market, Buffett began purchasing RJR bonds.
     Most junk bonds continued to look unattractive during this time, but
Buffett figured RJR Nabisco was unjustly punished. The company’s sta-
ble products were generating enough cash f low to cover its debt pay-
ments. Additionally, RJR Nabisco had been successful in selling portions
of its business at very attractive prices, thereby reducing its debt-to-
equity ratio. Buffett analyzed the risks of investing in RJR and concluded
that the company’s credit was higher than perceived by other investors
who were selling their bonds. RJR bonds were yielding 14.4 percent (a
businesslike return), and the depressed price offered the potential for cap-
ital gains.
     So, between 1989 and 1990, Buffett acquired $440 million in dis-
counted RJR bonds. In the spring of 1991, RJR Nabisco announced it
was retiring most of its junk bonds by redeeming them at face value. The
RJR bonds rose 34 percent, producing a $150 million capital gain for
Berkshire Hathaway.

Level 3 Communications
In 2002, Buffett bought up large bundles of other high-yield corporate
bonds, increasing his holdings in these securities sixfold to $8.3 billion.
                         Investing in Fixed-Income Securities          147

Of the total, 65 percent were in the energy industry and about $7 bil-
lion were bought through Berkshire insurance companies.
     Describing his thinking in the 2002 letter to shareholders, Buffett
wrote, “The Berkshire management does not believe the credit risks as-
sociated with the issuers of these instruments has correspondingly de-
clined.” And this comes from a man who does not take unaccounted-for
(read: unpriced) risks. To that point, he added, “Charlie and I detest tak-
ing even small risks unless we feel we are being adequately compensated
for doing so. About as far as we will go down that path is to occasionally
eat cottage cheese a day after the expiration date on the carton.”5
     In addition to pricing his risk, he also typically bought the securi-
ties at far less than what they were worth, even at distressed prices, and
waited until the asset value was realized.
     What is particularly intriguing about these bond purchases is that, in
all likelihood, Buffett would not have bought equity in many of these
companies. By the end of 2003, however, his high-yield investments paid
off to the tune of about $1.3 billion, while net income for the company
that year was a total of $8.3 billion. As the high-yield market skyrock-
eted, some of the bonds were called or sold. Buffett’s comment at the
time was simply, “Yesterday’s weeds are being priced as today’s f lowers.”
     In July 2002, three companies invested a total of $500 million in
Broomfield, Colorado-based Level 3 Communications’ ten-year con-
vertible bonds, with a coupon of 9 percent and a conversion price of
$3.41, to help the company make acquisitions and to enhance the com-
pany’s capital position. The three were Berkshire Hathaway ($100 mil-
lion), Legg Mason ($100 million) and Longleaf Partners ($300 million).
     Technology-intensive companies are not Buffett’s normal acquisition
fare; he candidly admits he does not know of a way to properly value
technology companies. This was an expensive deal for Level 3 but it gave
them the cash and credibility when they needed it. For his part, Buffett
obtained a lucrative (9 percent) investment with an equity position. At
the time, Buffett was quoted as saying that investors should expect 7 to 8
percent returns from the stock market annually, so at 9 percent, he was
ahead of the game.
     There is another aspect to this story that is typical of Buffett—a
strong component of managerial integrity and personal relationships.
Level 3 Communications was a spin-off from an Omaha-based con-
struction company, Peter Kiewit Sons; Buffett’s friend Walter Scott Jr.,
is both chairman emeritus of Kiewit and chairman of Level 3. Often
148     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

called Omaha’s first citizen, Scott was the driving force behind the
city’s zoo, its art museum, the engineering institute, and the Nebraska
Game and Parks Foundation. Scott and Buffett have close personal and
professional connections: Scott sits on Berkshire’s board, and the two
men are only f loors away from each other at Kiewit Plaza.
     Even though Buffett knew Scott well and held him in high regard,
he wanted the investment to be fair and transparent, with no question
that the relationship between the two men unduly inf luenced the deal.
So Buffett suggested that O. Mason Hawkins, chairman and chief ex-
ecutive of Southeastern Asset Management, which advises Longleaf
Partners, set up the deal and negotiate the terms.
     By mid-June 2003, a year later, Buffett, Legg Mason, and Longleaf
Partners exchanged $500 million for a total of 174 million Level 3 com-
mon shares (including an extra 27 million shares as an incentive to con-
vert). (Longleaf had already converted $43 million earlier in the year
and then converted the rest, $457 million, in June.)
     Buffett received 36.7 million shares. In June, he sold 16.8 million for
$117.6 million, and in November sold an additional 18.3 million shares
for $92.4 million. Sure enough, Level 3 made good on its debt payments,
and by the end of 2003, Buffett had doubled his money in 16 months.
On top of that, his bonds had earned $45 million of interest, and he still
held on to 1,644,900 of Level 3’s shares.

Qwest
In the summer of 2002, Berkshire purchased hundreds of millions of dol-
lars of bonds issued by Qwest Communications, a struggling telecommu-
nications company based in Denver formerly known as US West, and its
regulatory operating subsidiary, Qwest Corporation. At the time, Qwest
had $26 billion in debt and was in the midst of restating its 1999, 2000,
and 2001 financial statements. Bankruptcy rumors were f lying. Qwest
corporate bonds were trading at thirty-five to forty cents on the dollar
and the bonds of its operating company at eighty cents to the dollar.
Some of the bonds were yielding 12.5 percent and were backed with spe-
cific assets; other, riskier bonds were not. Buffett bought both.
     Most analysts at the time said that Qwest’s assets had enough value
for Buffett to more than recover his investment given the current trad-
ing price. And, if it had not been for the interest payments, Qwest
                         Investing in Fixed-Income Securities         149

would have had a healthy cash f low. The company’s most valuable asset
was the 14-state local phone service franchise, but Buffett had faith that
with former Ameritech CEO, Dick Notebaert, at the helm, the com-
pany would solve its problems.

Amazon.com
In July 2002, only one week after Buffett wrote CEO Jeff Bezos a let-
ter praising him for his decision to account for stock options as an ex-
pense, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’s high-yield bonds.
    Buffett clearly appreciates managers who exhibit integrity and
strong values, and he has long advocated for expensing stock options,
but he certainly was not on a goodwill mission when he bought the
Amazon.com bonds. The Government Employees Insurance Company,
the auto insurance unit of Berkshire, stood to make $16.4 million profit
on the investment in high-yield bonds, a 17 percent return in nine
months if Amazon repurchased the $264 million in 10 percent senior
notes that were issued in 1998. Later that summer, Buffett bought an
additional $60.1 million of Amazon’s 67⁄8 percent convertible bonds.
Assuming a price of $60.00 per $1,000 bond, the yield would have been
a healthy 11.46 percent and the yield to maturity would have been even
higher once interest payments were calculated in.
    It is well known that Buffett sticks with things he understands and
shies away from technology. His involvement with the Internet is limited
to three online activities: He buys books, reads the Wall Street Journal,
and plays bridge. Buffett even made fun of his own technology avoidance
in his 2000 letter to shareholders: “We have embraced the 21st century
by entering such cutting-edge industries as brick, carpet and paint. Try
to control your excitement.”6
    So why was he attracted to Amazon’s bonds? First, he said, they
were “extraordinarily cheap.” Second, he had faith that the company
would thrive. Buffett may also have observed that Amazon.com had a
similar profile to many of his other investments in retail companies.
Amazon.com generates its revenue through huge amounts of sales for
low prices and although it has low margins, the company is efficient
and profitable. Buffett admires the way Bezos has created a mega-
brand and the way he has pulled the company through some very dif-
ficult times.
150     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

ARBITRAGE

Arbitrage, in its simplest form, involves purchasing a security in one
market and simultaneously selling the same security in another market.
The object is to profit from price discrepancies. For example, if stock in
a company was quoted as $20 per share in the London market and $20.01
in the Tokyo market, an arbitrageur could profit from simultaneously
purchasing shares of the company in London and selling the same shares
in Tokyo. In this case, there is no capital risk. The arbitrageur is merely
profiting from the inefficiencies that occur between markets. Because
this transaction involves no risk, it is appropriately called riskless arbi-
trage. Risk arbitrage, on the other hand, is the sale or purchase of a secu-
rity in hopes of profiting from some announced value.
     The most common type of risk arbitrage involves the purchase of a
stock at a discount to some future value. This future value is usually
based on a corporate merger, liquidation, tender offer, or reorganization.
The risk an arbitrageur confronts is that the future announced price of
the stock may not be realized.
     To evaluate risk arbitrage opportunities, explains Buffett, you must
answer four basic questions. “How likely is it that the promised event
will indeed occur? How long will your money be tied up? What chance
is there that something better will transpire—a competing takeover
bid, for example? What will happen if the event does not take place be-
cause of antitrust action, financing glitches, etc.?”7
     Confronted with more cash than investable ideas, Buffett has often
turned to arbitrage as a useful way to employ his extra cash. The Arkata
Corporation transaction in 1981, where he bought over 600,000 shares
as the company was going through a leveraged buyout, was a good ex-
ample. However, whereas most arbitrageurs might participate in fifty or
more deals annually, Buffett sought out only a few, financially large
transactions. He limited his participation to deals that were announced
and friendly, and he refused to speculate about potential takeovers or the
prospects for greenmail.
     Although he never calculated his arbitrage performance over the
years, Buffett estimated that Berkshire has averaged an annual return of
about 25 percent pretax. Because arbitrage is often a substitute for
short-term Treasury bills, Buffett’s appetite for deals f luctuated with
Berkshire’s cash level.
                            Investing in Fixed-Income Securities       151

     Nowadays, however, he does not engage in arbitrage on a large
scale but rather keeps his excess cash in Treasuries and other short-term
liquid investments. Sometimes Buffett holds medium-term, tax-exempt
bonds as cash alternatives. He realizes that by substituting medium-
term bonds for short-term Treasury bills, he runs the risk of principal
loss if he is forced to sell at disadvantageous time. But because these tax-
free bonds offer higher aftertax returns than Treasury bills, Buffett fig-
ures that the potential loss is offset by the gain in income.
     With Berkshire’s historical success in arbitrage, shareholders might
wonder why Buffett strayed from this strategy. Admittedly, Buffett’s in-
vestment returns were better than he imagined, but by 1989 the arbi-
trage landscape started changing. The financial excesses brought about by
the leveraged buyout market were creating an environment of unbridled
enthusiasm. Buffett was not sure when lenders and buyers would come to
their senses, but he has always acted cautiously when others are giddy.
Even before the collapse of the UAL buyout in October 1989, Buffett
was pulling back from arbitrage transactions. Another reason may be that
deals of a size that would really make a difference to Buffett’s very large
portfolio simply do not exist.
     In any case, Berkshire’s withdrawal from arbitrage was made easier
with the advent of convertible preferred stocks.


C O N V E RT I B L E P R E F E R R E D S T O C K S

A convertible preferred stock is a hybrid security that possesses charac-
teristics of both stocks and bonds. Generally, these stocks provide in-
vestors with higher current income than common stocks. This higher
yield offers protection from downside price risk. If the common stock
declines, the higher yield of the convertible preferred stock prevents it
from falling as low as the common shares. In theory, the convertible
stock will fall in price until its current yield approximates the value of a
nonconvertible bond with a similar yield, credit, and maturity.
     A convertible preferred stock also provides the investor with the op-
portunity to participate in the upside potential of the common shares.
Since it is convertible into common shares, when the common rises, the
convertible stock will rise as well. However, because the convertible
stock provides high income and has the potential for capital gains, it is
152     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

priced at a premium to the common stock. This premium is ref lected in
the rate at which the preferred is convertible into common shares. Typi-
cally, the conversion premium may be 20 percent to 30 percent. This
means that the common must rise in price 20 to 30 percent before
the convertible stock can be converted into common shares without los-
ing value.
     In the same way that he invested in high-yield bonds, Buffett in-
vested in convertible preferred stocks whenever the opportunity pre-
sented itself as better than other investments. In the late 1980s and
1990s, Buffett made several investments in convertible preferred stocks,
including Salomon Brothers, Gillette, USAir, Champion International,
and American Express.
     Takeover groups were challenging several of these companies, and
Buffett became known as a “white knight,” rescuing companies from
hostile invaders. Buffett, however, certainly did not perceive himself as a
pro bono savior. He simply saw these purchases as good investments
with a high potential for profit. At the time, the preferred stocks of these
companies offered him a higher return than he could find elsewhere.
     Some of the companies issuing the convertible preferred securities
were familiar to Buffett, but in other cases he had no special insight about
the business nor could he predict with any confidence what its future cash
f lows would be. This unpredictability, Buffett explains, is the precise rea-
son Berkshire’s investment was a convertible preferred issue rather than
common stock. Despite the conversion potential, the real value of the pre-
ferred stock, in his eye, was its fixed-income characteristics.
     There is one exception: MidAmerican. This is a multifaceted trans-
action involving convertible preferred and common stock as well as debt.
Here, Buffett values the convertible preferred for its fixed-income re-
turn as well as for its future equity stake.

MidAmerican
On March 14, 2000, Berkshire acquired 34.56 million shares of con-
vertible preferred stock along with 900,942 shares of common stock in
MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company, a Des Moines-based gas and
electric utility, for approximately $1.24 billion, or $35.05 per share.
Two years later, in March 2002, Berkshire bought 6.7 million more
shares of the convertible preferred stock for $402 million. This brought
                         Investing in Fixed-Income Securities         153

Berkshire’s holdings to over 9 percent voting interest and just over 80
percent economic interest in MidAmerican.
     Since 2002, Berkshire and certain of its subsidiaries also have ac-
quired approximately $1.728 million of 11 percent nontransferable
trust preferred securities, of which $150 million were redeemed in
August 2003. An additional $300 million was invested by David Sokol,
MidAmerican’s chairman and CEO, and Walter Scott, MidAmerican’s
largest individual shareholder. It was, in fact, Scott who initially ap-
proached Buffett ; it was the first major deal they had worked on to-
gether in their 50 years of friendship.
     The price Buffett paid for MidAmerican was toward the low end of
the scale, which according to reports was $34 to $48 per share, so he
was able to achieve a certain discount. Yet Buffett also committed him-
self and Berkshire to MidAmerican’s future growth to the extent that
they would support MidAmerican’s acquisition of pipelines up to $15
billion. As part of its growth strategy, MidAmerican, with Buffett’s
help, bought pipelines from distressed energy merchants.
     One such purchase happened almost immediately. In March 2002,
Buffett bought, from Tulsa-based Williams Company, the Kern River
Gas Transmission project, which transported 850 million cubic feet of
gas per day over 935 miles. Buffett paid $960 million, including as-
sumption of debt and an additional $1 billion in capital expenses.
     MidAmerican also went on to acquire Dynegy’s Northern Natural
gas pipeline later in 2002 for a bargain price of about $900 million, plus
the assumption of debt. Then, as of early January 2004, Berkshire an-
nounced it would put up about 30 percent of the costs, or $2 billion, for
a new natural gas pipeline tapping Alaskan North Slope natural gas re-
serves that would boost U.S. reserves by 7 percent. MidAmerican chair-
man Sokol said that without Buffett’s help, the investment would have
been a strain on MidAmerican.
     In another but related transaction, a Berkshire subsidiary, MEHC
Investment Inc., bought $275 million of Williams’s preferred stock.
This preferred stock does not generally vote with the common stock in
the election of directors, but in this deal Berkshire Hathaway gained the
right to elect 20 percent of MidAmerican’s board as well as rights of ap-
proval over certain important transactions.
     Later that summer, Buffett, along with Lehman Brothers, provided
Williams with a one-year $900 million senior loan at over 19 percent,
154    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

secured by almost all the oil and gas assets of Barrett Resources, which
Williams originally acquired for about $2.8 billion. It was reported that
Buffett’s loan was part of a $3.4 billion package of cash and credit that
Williams, still an investment-grade company, needed to stave off bank-
ruptcy. The terms of the deal were tough and laden with conditions and
fees that reportedly could have put the interest rate on the deal at 34
percent. Still, it can be argued that not only was Buffett helping an
investment-grade company out of a tight spot but also protecting him-
self against the high risk of the situation.
     Although MidAmerican was not Buffett’s only foray into the then-
beleaguered energy industry, it definitely was a complex, multifaceted
investment. Buffett believed that the company was worth more than its
then-current value in the market. He knew that the management, in-
cluding Walter Scott and David Sokol, operated with great credibility,
integrity, and intelligence. Finally, the energy industry can be a stable
business, and Buffett was hoping it would become even more stable and
profitable.
     In MidAmerican, Buffett bought a fixed-income investment with
an equity potential. As with all his other investments, he took a charac-
teristic ownership approach and committed himself to the company’s
growth. He made some money off the Williams fixed-income instru-
ments while protecting himself with covenants, high rates, and assets
(Barrett Resources). As it turned out, by October 2003, MidAmerican
had grown into the third largest distributor of electricity in the United
Kingdom and was providing electricity to 689,000 people in Iowa,
while the Kern River and Northern Natural pipelines carried about 7.8
percent of the natural gas in the United States. In total, the company had
about $19 billion of assets and $6 billion in annual revenues from 25
states and several other countries, and was yielding Berkshire Hathaway
about $300 million per year.

                                      
It is important to remember that Buffett thinks of convertible preferred
stocks first as fixed-income securities and second as vehicles for appre-
ciation. Hence the value of Berkshire’s preferred stocks cannot be any
less than the value of a similar nonconvertible preferred and, because of
conversion rights, is probably more.
                          Investing in Fixed-Income Securities          155

     Buffett is widely regarded as the world’s greatest value investor,
which basically means buying stocks, bonds, and other securities, and
whole companies, for a great deal less than their real worth, and waiting
until the asset value is realized. So whether it is blue-chip stocks or high-
yield corporate debt, Buffett applies his same principles. A value investor
goes where the deals are.
     Although Buffett is usually thought of as a long-term investor in
common stocks, he has the capability, stamina, and capital to wade into
beleaguered industries and pick out diamonds in the rough. He chooses
specific companies with honest, smart managers and cash-generating
products. He also chooses the instruments that make the most sense at
the time. Usually, he has been right and when he’s not, he admits it. As
it turns out, his decision to move strongly into fixed-income instru-
ments in 2002 and 2003 was definitely right. In 2002, Berkshire’s gross
realized gain from fixed-income investments was $1 billion. In 2003,
that number almost tripled, to $2.7 billion.
                                  10

                Managing Your
                  Portfolio

U
      p to this point, we have studied Warren Buffett’s approach to
      making investment decisions, which is built on timeless principles
      codified into twelve tenets. We watched over his shoulder as he
applied those principles to buy stocks and bonds, and to acquire com-
panies. And we took the time to understand the insights from others
that helped shape his philosophy about investing.
    But as every investor knows, deciding which stocks to buy is only
half the story. The other half is the ongoing process of managing the
portfolio and learning how to cope with the emotional roller coaster
that inevitably accompanies such decisions.
    It is no surprise that here, too, the leadership of Warren Buffett will
show us the way.

                                   
Hollywood has given us a visual cliché of what a money manager looks
like: talking into two phones at once, frantically taking notes while try-
ing to keep an eye on computer screens that blink and blip at him from
all directions, tearing at his hair whenever one of those computer blinks
shows a minuscule drop in stock price.
     Warren Buffett is about as far from that kind of frenzy as anything
imaginable. He moves with the calm that comes of great confidence. He

                                                                       157
158     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

has no need to watch a dozen computer screens at once, for the minute-
by-minute changes in the market are of no interest to him. Warren
Buffett doesn’t think in minutes, days, or months, but years. He doesn’t
need to keep up with hundreds of companies, because his investments
are focused in just a select few. This approach, which he calls “focus in-
vesting,” greatly simplifies the task of portfolio management.




      “We just focus on a few outstanding companies. We’re focus
      investors.”1
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1994




S TAT U S Q U O : A C H O I C E O F T W O

The current state of portfolio management, as practiced by everyone
else, appears to be locked into a tug-of-war between two competing
strategies—active portfolio management and index investing.
     Active portfolio managers are constantly at work buying and selling
a great number of common stocks. Their job is to try to keep their
clients satisfied. That means consistently outperforming the market so
that on any given day should a client apply the obvious measuring
stick—how is my portfolio doing compared with the market overall—
the answer will be positive and the client will leave her money in the
fund. To keep on top, active managers try to predict what will happen
with stocks in the coming six months and continually churn the portfo-
lio, hoping to take advantage of their predictions.
     Index investing, on the other hand, is a buy-and-hold passive ap-
proach. It involves assembling, and then holding, a broadly diversified
portfolio of common stocks deliberately designed to mimic the behavior
of a specific benchmark index, such as the Standard & Poor’s 500. The
simplest and by far the most common way to achieve this is through an
indexed mutual fund.
     Proponents of both approaches have long waged combat to prove
which one will ultimately yield the higher investment return.
                                       M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   159

     Active portfolio managers argue that, by virtue of their superior
stock-picking skills, they can do better than any index. Index strate-
gists, for their part, have recent history on their side. In a study that
tracked results in a twenty-year period, from 1977 through 1997, the
percentage number of equity mutual funds that have been able to beat
the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index dropped dramatically, from 50 per-
cent in the early years to barely 25 percent in the final four years. And
as of November 1998, 90 percent of actively managed funds were un-
derperforming the market (averaging 14 percent lower than the S&P
500), which means that only 10 percent were doing better.2
     Active portfolio management as commonly practiced today stands a
very small chance of outperforming the index. For one thing, it is
grounded in a very shaky premise: Buy today whatever we predict can
be sold soon at a profit, regardless of what it is. The fatal f law in that
logic is that given the complexity of the financial universe, predictions
are impossible. Second, this high level of activity comes with transac-
tion costs that diminish the net returns to investors. When we factor in
these costs, it becomes apparent that the active money management
business has created its own downfall.
     Indexing, because it does not trigger equivalent expenses, is better
than actively managed portfolios in many respects. But even the best
index fund, operating at its peak, will only net you exactly the returns
of the overall market. Index investors can do no worse than the market,
and also no better.
     Intelligent investors must ask themselves: Am I satisfied with aver-
age? Can I do better?


A NEW CHOICE

Given a choice between active and index approaches, Warren Buffett
would unhesitatingly pick indexing. This is especially true for investors
with a very low tolerance for risk, and for people who know very little
about the economics of a business but still want to participate in the
long-term benefits of investing in common stocks.
    “By periodically investing in an index fund,” he says in inimitable
Buffett style, “the know-nothing investor can actually outperform most
investment professionals.”3 Buffett, however, would be quick to point
160     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

out that there is a third alternative—a very different kind of active port-
folio strategy that significantly increases the odds of beating the index.
That alternative is focus investing.


FOCUS INVESTING: THE BIG PICTURE

Reduced to its essence, focus investing means this: Choose a few stocks
that are likely to produce above-average returns over the long haul,
concentrate the bulk of your investments in those stocks, and have the
fortitude to hold steady during any short-term market gyrations.
    The following sections describe the separate elements in the process.

“Find Outstanding Companies”
Over the years, Warren Buffett has developed a way of determining
which companies are worthy places to put his money; it rests on a no-
tion of great common sense: If the company is doing well and is man-
aged by smart people, eventually its stock price will ref lect its inherent
value. Buffett thus devotes most of his attention not to tracking share
price but to analyzing the economics of the underlying business and as-
sessing its management.
     The Buffett tenets, described in earlier chapters, can be thought of as
a kind of tool belt. Each tenet is one analytical tool, and in the aggregate


               THE FOCUS INVESTOR’S GOLDEN RULES
      1. Concentrate your investments in outstanding companies
         run by strong management.
      2. Limit yourself to the number of companies you can truly
         understand. Ten to twenty is good, more than twenty is
         asking for trouble.
      3. Pick the very best of your good companies, and put the
         bulk of your investment there.
      4. Think long-term: five to ten years, minimum.
      5. Volatility happens. Carry on.
                                        M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   161

they provide a method for isolating the companies with the best chance
for high economic returns. Buffett uses his tool belt to find companies
with a long history of superior performance and a stable management,
and that stability means they have a high probability of performing in
the future as they have in the past. And that is the heart of focus invest-
ing: concentrating your investments in companies with the highest
probability of above-average performance.

“Less Is More”
Remember Buffett’s advice to a know-nothing investor—to stay with
index funds? What is more interesting for our purposes is what he
said next:
     “If you are a know-something investor, able to understand busi-
ness economics and to find five to ten sensibly priced companies that
possess important long-term competitive advantages, conventional
diversification ( broadly based active portfolios) makes no sense for
you.”4
     What’s wrong with conventional diversification? For one thing, it
greatly increases the chances that you will buy something you don’t
know enough about. Philip Fisher, who was known for his focus port-
folios, although he didn’t use the term, profoundly inf luenced Buffett’s
thinking in this area. Fisher always said he preferred owning a small
number of outstanding companies that he understood well to a large
number of average ones, many of which he understood poorly.
     “Know-something” investors, applying the Buffett tenets, would
do better to focus their attention on just a few companies. How many
is a few? Even the high priests of modern finance have discovered that,
on average, just fifteen stocks gives you 85 percent diversification.5 For
the average investor, a legitimate case can be made for ten to twenty.
Focus investing falls apart if it is applied to a large portfolio with dozens
of stocks.

“Put Big Bets on High-Probability Events”
Phil Fisher’s inf luence on Buffett can also be seen in another way—his
belief that the only reasonable course when you encounter a strong op-
portunity is to make a large investment. Warren Buffett echoes that
162     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

thinking: “With each investment you make, you should have the courage
and the conviction to place at least ten percent of your net worth in that
stock.”6
    You can see why Buffett says the ideal portfolio should contain no
more than ten stocks, if each is to receive 10 percent. Yet focus invest-
ing is not a simple matter of finding ten good stocks and dividing your
investment pool equally among them. Even though all the stocks in a
focus portfolio are high-probability events, some will inevitably be
higher than others, and they should be allocated a greater proportion of
the investment.
    Blackjack players understand this intuitively: When the odds are
strongly in your favor, put down a big bet.



      I can’t be involved in 50 or 75 things. That’s a Noah’s Ark
      way of investing—you end up with a zoo. I like to put mean-
      ingful amounts of money in a few things.7
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1987




     Think back for a moment to Buffett’s decision to buy American
Express for the limited partnership, described in Chapter 1. When
threat of scandal caused the company’s share price to drop by almost
half, Buffett invested a whopping 40 percent of the partnership’s assets
in this one company. He was convinced that, despite the controversy,
the company was solid and eventually the stock price would return to
its proper level; in the meantime, he recognized a terrific opportunity.
But was it worth almost half of his total assets? It was a big bet that paid
off handsomely: Two years later, he sold the much-appreciated shares
for a profit of $20 million.

“Be Patient”
Focus investing is the antithesis of a broadly diversified high-turnover
approach. Although focus investing stands the best chance among all ac-
tive strategies of outperforming an index return over time, it requires
                                        M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   163

investors to patiently hold their portfolio even when it appears that
other strategies are winning.
     How long is long enough? As you might imagine, there is no hard-
and-fast rule (although Buffett would probably say that anything less
than five years is a fool’s theory). The goal is not zero turnover (never
selling anything); that’s foolish in the opposite direction, for it would
prevent you from taking advantage of something better when it comes
along. As a general rule of thumb, we should aim for a turnover rate be-
tween 20 and 10 percent, which means holding the stock for some-
where between five and ten years.

“Don’t Panic over Price Changes”
Focus investing pursues above-average results, and there is strong evi-
dence, both in academic research and actual case histories, that the pur-
suit is successful. There can be no doubt, however, that the ride is
bumpy, for price volatility is a necessary by-product of the focus ap-
proach. Focus investors tolerate the bumpiness because they know that
in the long run the underlying economics of the companies will more
than compensate for any short-term price f luctuations.
    Buffett is a master bump-ignorer. So is his partner, Charlie
Munger, who once calculated, using a compound interest table and les-
sons learned playing poker, that as long as he could handle the price
volatility, owning as few as three stocks would be plenty. “I knew I
could handle the bumps psychologically, because I was raised by people
who believe in handling bumps.”8
    Maybe you also come from a long line of people who can handle
bumps. But even if you were not born so lucky, you can acquire some of
their traits. It is a matter of consciously deciding to change how you
think and behave. Acquiring new habits and thought patterns does not
happen overnight, but gradually teaching yourself not to panic and act
rashly in response to the vagaries of the market is doable—and necessary.


B U F F E T T A N D M O D E R N P O RT F O L I O T H E O RY

Warren Buffett’s faith in the fundamental ideas of focus investing puts
him at odds with many other financial gurus, and also with a package
164    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

of concepts that is collectively known as modern portfolio theory. Be-
cause this is a book about Buffett’s thinking, and because Buffett him-
self does not subscribe to this theory, we will not spend much time
describing it. But as you continue to learn about investing, you will
hear about this theory, and so it is important to cover its basic elements.
Then we’ll give Buffett a chance to weigh in on each.
     Modern portfolio theory is a combination of three seminal ideas
about finance from three powerful minds. Harry Markowitz, a graduate
student in economics at the University of Chicago, first quantified the
relationship between return and risk. Using a mathematical tool called
covariance, he measured the combined movement of a group of stocks,
and used that to determine the riskiness of an entire portfolio.
     Markowitz concluded that investment risk is not a function of how
much the price of any individual stock changes, but how much a group
of stocks changes in the same direction. If they do so, there is a good
chance that economic shifts will drive them all down at the same time.
The only reasonable protection, he said, was diversification.
     About ten years later, another graduate student, Bill Sharpe from
the University of California-Los Angeles, developed a mathematical
process for measuring volatility that simplified Markowitz’s approach.
He called it the Capital Asset Pricing Model.
     So in the space of one decade, two academicians had defined two
important elements of what we would later come to call modern port-
folio theory: Markowitz with his idea that the proper reward/risk bal-
ance depends on diversification, and Sharpe with his definition of
risk. A third piece—the efficient market theory (EMT)—came from
a young assistant professor of finance at the University of Chicago,
Eugene Fama.
     Fama began studying the changes in stock prices in the early 1960s.
An intense reader, he absorbed all the written work on stock market be-
havior then available and concluded that stock prices are not predictable
because the market is too efficient. In an efficient market, as informa-
tion becomes available, a great many smart people aggressively apply that
information in a way that causes prices to adjust instantaneously, before
anyone can profit. At any given moment, stock prices ref lect all available
information. Predictions about the future therefore have no place in an
efficient market, because the share prices adjust too quickly.
                                       M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   165

Buffett’s View of Risk
In modern portfolio theory, the volatility of the share price defines risk.
But throughout his career, Buffett has always perceived a drop in share
prices as an opportunity to make money. In his mind, then, a dip in price
actually reduces risk. He points out, “For owners of a business—and
that’s the way we think of shareholders—the academics’ definition of
risk is far off the mark, so much so that it produces absurdities.”9
    Buffett has a different definition of risk: the possibility of harm.
And that is a factor of the intrinsic value of the business, not the price
behavior of the stock. Financial harm comes from misjudging the fu-
ture profits of the business, plus the uncontrollable, unpredictable effect
of taxes and inf lation.
    Furthermore, Buffett sees risk as inextricably linked to an investor’s
time horizon. If you buy a stock today, he explains, with the intention
of selling it tomorrow, then you have entered into a risky transaction.
The odds of predicting whether share prices will be up or down in a
short period are the same as the odds of predicting the toss of a coin;
you will lose half of the time. However, says Buffett, if you extend your
time horizon out to several years (always assuming that you have made
a sensible purchase), then the odds shift meaningfully in your favor.


Buffett’s View of Diversification
Buffett’s view on risk drives his diversification strategy, and here, too,
his thinking is the polar opposite of modern portfolio theory. Accord-
ing to that theory, the primary benefit of a broadly diversified portfo-
lio is to mitigate the price volatility of the individual stocks. But if you
are unconcerned with price volatility, as Buffett is, then you will also
see portfolio diversification in a different light.
     He knows that many so-called pundits would say the Berkshire
strategy is riskier, but he is not swayed. “We believe that a policy of
portfolio concentration may well decrease risk if it raises, as it should,
both the intensity with which an investor thinks about a business and
the comfort level he must feel with its economic characteristics before
buying into it.”10 By purposely focusing on just a few select companies,
you are better able to study them closely and understand their intrinsic
166     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

value. The more knowledge you have about your company, the less risk
you are likely taking.
    “Diversification serves as protection against ignorance,” explains
Buffett. “If you want to make sure that nothing bad happens to you rel-
ative to the market, you should own everything. There is nothing wrong
with that. It’s a perfectly sound approach for somebody who doesn’t
know how to analyze businesses.”11

Buffett’s View of the Efficient Market Theory
Buffett’s problem with the EMT rests on a central point: It makes no
provision for investors who analyze all the available information, as
Buffett urges them to do, which gives them a competitive advantage.
    Nonetheless, EMT is still religiously taught in business schools, a
fact that gives Warren Buffett no end of satisfaction. “Naturally the
disservice done students and gullible investment professionals who
have swallowed EMT has been an extraordinary service to us and
other followers of Graham,” Buffett wryly observed. “From a selfish
standpoint, we should probably endow chairs to ensure the perpetual
teaching of EMT.”12

                                       
In many ways, modern portfolio theory protects investors who have
limited knowledge and understanding on how to value a business. But
that protection comes with a price. According to Buffett, “Modern
portfolio theory tells you how to be average. But I think almost any-
body can figure out how to do average in the fifth grade.”13


THE SUPERINVESTORS OF BUFFETTVILLE

One of the greatest investment books of all time came out in 1934, dur-
ing the height of the Great Depression. Security Analysis, by Benjamin
Graham and David Dodd, is universally acclaimed a classic, and is still
in print after five editions and sixty-five years. It is impossible to over-
state its inf luence on the modern world of investing.
                                       M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   167

    Fifty years after its original publication, the Columbia Business
School sponsored a seminar marking the anniversary of this seminal text.
Warren Buffett, one of the school’s best-known alumni and the most fa-
mous modern-day proponent of Graham’s value approach, addressed the
gathering. He titled his speech “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-
Doddsville,” and in its own way, it has become as much a classic as the
book it honored.14
    He began by recapping the central argument of modern portfolio
theory—that the stock market is efficient, all stocks are priced correctly,
and therefore anyone who beats the market year after year is simply
lucky. Maybe so, he said, but I know some folks who have done it, and
their success can’t be explained away as simply random chance.
    And he proceeded to lay out the evidence. The examples he pre-
sented that day were all people who had managed to beat the market
consistently over time, not because of luck, but because they followed
principles learned from the same source: Ben Graham. They all reside,
he said, in the “intellectual village” of Graham-and-Doddsville.
    Nearly two decades later, I thought it might be interesting to take
an updated look at a few people who exemplify the approach defined
by Graham and who also share Buffett’s belief in the value of a focused
portfolio with a small number of stocks. I think of them as the Super-
investors of Buffettville: Charlie Munger, Bill Ruane, Lou Simpson,
and of course Buffett. From their performance records, there is much
we can learn.

Charlie Munger
Although Berkshire Hathaway’s investment performance is usually tied
to its chairman, we should never forget that vice chairman Charlie
Munger is an outstanding investor. Shareholders who have attended
Berkshire’s annual meeting or read Charlie’s thoughts in Outstanding
Investor Digest realize what a fine intellect he has.
    “I ran into him in about 1960,” said Buffett, “and I told him law was
fine as a hobby but he could better.”15 As you may recall, Munger at the
time had a thriving law practice in Los Angeles, but gradually shifted his
energies to a new investment partnership bearing his name. The results
of his talents can be found in Table 10.1.
168    T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

      Table 10.1 Charles Munger Partnership
                                         Annual Percentage Change
                                    Overall               Dow Jones
      Year                      Partnership (%)      Industrial Average (%)
      1962                           30.1                    −7.6
      1963                           71.7                    20.6
      1964                           49.7                    18.7
      1965                            8.4                    14.2
      1966                           12.4                   −15.8
      1967                           56.2                    19.0
      1968                           40.4                     7.7
      1969                           28.3                   −11.6
      1970                           −0.1                     8.7
      1971                           25.4                     9.8
      1972                            8.3                    18.2
      1973                          −31.9                   −13.1
      1974                          −31.5                   −23.1
      1975                           73.2                    44.4
      Average Return                 24.3                     6.4
      Standard Deviation             33.0                    18.5
      Minimum                       −31.9                   −23.1
      Maximum                        73.2                    44.4


    “His portfolio was concentrated in very few securities and there-
fore, his record was much more volatile,” Buffett explained, “but it
was based on the same discount-from-value approach.” In making in-
vestment decisions for his partnership, Charlie followed the Graham
methodology and would look only at companies that were selling
below their intrinsic value. “He was willing to accept greater peaks
and valleys in performance, and he happens to be a fellow whose psy-
che goes toward concentration.”16
    Notice that Buffett does not use the word risk in describing
Charlie’s performance. Using the conventional definition of risk
(price volatility), we would have to say that over its thirteen-year his-
tory Charlie’s partnership was extremely risky, with a standard devia-
tion almost twice that of the market. But beating the average annual
return of the market by 18 points over those same thirteen years was
not the act of a risky man, but of an astute investor.
                                       M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   169

Bill Ruane
Buffett first met Bill Ruane in 1951, when both were taking Ben Gra-
ham’s Security Analysis class at Columbia. The two classmates stayed in
contact, and Buffett watched Ruane’s investment performance over the
years with admiration. When Buffett closed his investment partnership
in 1969, he asked Ruane if he would be willing to handle the funds of
some of the partners, and that was the beginning of the Sequoia Fund.
    It was a difficult time to set up a mutual fund. The stock market
was splitting into a two-tier market, with most of the hot money gyrat-
ing toward the so-called Nifty-Fifty (the big-name companies like IBM
and Xerox), leaving the “value” stocks far behind. Ruane was unde-
terred. Later Buffett commented, “I am happy to say that my partners,
to an amazing degree, not only stayed with him but added money, with
happy results.”17
    Sequoia Fund was a true pioneer, the first mutual fund run on the
principles of focus investing. The public record of Sequoia’s holdings
demonstrates clearly that Bill Ruane and Rick Cuniff, his partner in
Ruane, Cuniff & Company, managed a tightly focused, low-turnover
portfolio. On average, well over 90 percent of the fund was concentrated
between six and ten companies. Even so, the economic diversity of the
portfolio was, and continues to be, broad.
    Bill Ruane’s point of view is in many ways unique among money
managers. Generally speaking, most managers begin with some precon-
ceived notion about portfolio management and then fill in the portfolio
with various stocks. At Ruane, Cuniff & Company, the partners begin
with the idea of selecting the best possible stocks and then let the port-
folio form around these selections.
    Selecting the best possible stocks, of course, requires a high level of
research, and here again Ruane, Cuniff & Company stands apart from
the rest of the industry. The firm eschews Wall Street’s broker-fed re-
search reports and instead relies on its own intensive company investi-
gations. “We don’t go in much for titles at our firm,” Ruane once
said, “[but] if we did, my business card would read Bill Ruane, Re-
search Analyst.”18
    How well has this unique approach served their shareholders?
Table 10.2 outlines the investment performance of Sequoia Fund from
1971 through 2003. During this period, Sequoia earned an average
      Table 10.2 Sequoia Fund, Inc.
                                  Annual Percentage Change
                                 Sequoia           S&P 500
      Year                        Fund              Index
      1971                         13.5              14.3
      1972                          3.7              18.9
      1973                        −24.0             −14.8
      1974                        −15.7             −26.4
      1975                         60.5              37.2
      1976                         72.3              23.6
      1977                         19.9              −7.4
      1978                         23.9               6.4
      1979                         12.1              18.2
      1980                         12.6              32.3
      1981                         21.5              −5.0
      1982                         31.2              21.4
      1983                         27.3              22.4
      1984                         18.5               6.1
      1985                         28.0              31.6
      1986                         13.3              18.6
      1987                          7.4               5.2
      1988                         11.1              16.5
      1989                         27.9              31.6
      1990                         −3.8              −3.1
      1991                         40.0              30.3
      1992                          9.4               7.6
      1993                         10.8              10.0
      1994                          3.3               1.4
      1995                         41.4              37.5
      1996                         21.7              22.9
      1997                         42.3              33.4
      1998                         35.3              28.6
      1999                        −16.5              21.0
      2000                         20.1              −9.1
      2001                         10.5             −11.9
      2002                         −2.6             −22.1
      2003                         17.1              28.7

      Average Return               18.0              12.9
      Standard Deviation           20.2              17.7
      Minimum                     −24.0             −26.4
      Maximum                      72.3              37.5

170
                                      M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   171

annual return of 18 percent, compared with the 12.9 percent of the
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index.

Lou Simpson
About the time Warren Buffett began acquiring the stock of the Gov-
ernment Employees Insurance Company (GEICO) in the late 1970s, he
also made another acquisition that would have a direct benefit on the
insurance company’s financial health. His name was Lou Simpson.
     Simpson, who earned a master’s degree in economics from Prince-
ton, worked for both Stein Roe & Farnham and Western Asset Manage-
ment before Buffett lured him to GEICO in 1979. He is now CEO of
Capital Operations for the company. Recalling his job interview, Buf-
fett remembers that Lou had “the ideal temperament for investing.”19
Lou, he said, was an independent thinker who was confident of his own
research and “who derived no particular pleasure from operating with
or against the crowd.”
     Simpson, a voracious reader, ignores Wall Street research and in-
stead pores over annual reports. His common stock selection process is
similar to Buffett’s. He purchases only high-return businesses that are
run by able management and are available at reasonable prices. Lou also
has something else in common with Buffett. He focuses his portfolio on
only a few stocks. GEICO’s billion-dollar equity portfolio customarily
owns fewer than ten stocks.
     Between 1980 and 1996, GEICO’s portfolio achieved an average
annual return of 24.7 percent, compared with the market’s return of
17.8 percent (see Table 10.3). “These are not only terrific figures,” says
Buffett, “but, fully as important, they have been achieved in the right
way. Lou has consistently invested in undervalued common stocks that,
individually, were unlikely to present him with a permanent loss and
that, collectively, were close to risk free.”20
     It is important to note that the focus strategy sometimes means en-
during several weak years. Even the Superinvestors—undeniably skilled,
undeniably successful—faced periods of short-term underperformance. A
look at Table 10.4 shows that they would have struggled through several
difficult periods.
     What do you think would have happened to Munger, Simpson, and
Ruane if they had been rookie managers starting their careers today in
an environment that can only see the value of one year’s, or even one
172     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

             Table 10.3 Lou Simpson, GEICO
                                         Annual Percentage Change
                                        GEICO
             Year                     Equities (%)      S&P 500 (%)
             1980                         23.7             32.3
             1981                          5.4             −5.0
             1982                         45.8             21.4
             1983                         36.0             22.4
             1984                         21.8              6.1
             1985                         45.8             31.6
             1986                         38.7             18.6
             1987                        −10.0              5.1
             1988                         30.0             16.6
             1989                         36.1             31.7
             1990                         −9.1             −3.1
             1991                         57.1             30.5
             1992                         10.7              7.6
             1993                          5.1             10.1
             1994                         13.3              1.3
             1995                         39.7             37.6
             1996                         29.2             37.6
             Average Return               24.7             17.8
             Standard Deviation           19.5             14.3
             Minimum                     −10.0             −5.0
             Maximum                      57.1             37.6


quarter’s, performance? They would probably have been canned, to
their clients’ profound loss.


M A K I N G C H A N G E S I N Y O U R P O RT F O L I O

Don’t be lulled into thinking that just because a focus portfolio lags the
stock market on a price basis from time to time, you are excused from
the ongoing responsibility of performance scrutiny. Granted, a focus in-
vestor should not become a slave to the stock market’s whims, but you
should always be acutely aware of all economic stirrings of the com-
panies in your portfolio. There will be times when buying something,
selling something else, is exactly the right thing to do.
                                             M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   173

Table 10.4 The Superinvestors of Buffettville
                                                   Number of
            Number of        Number of            Consecutive            Underperformance
             Years of         Years of              Years of             Years as a Percent
           Performance    Underperformance      Underperformance            of All Years
Munger          14                5                       3                        36
Ruane           29               11                       4                        37
Simpson         17                4                       1                        24


The Decision to Buy: An Easy Guideline
When Buffett considers adding an investment, he first looks at what he
already owns to see whether the new purchase is any better. “What
Buffett is saying is something very useful to practically any investor,”
Charlie Munger stresses. “For an ordinary individual, the best thing
you already have should be your measuring stick.”
    What happens next is one of the most critical but widely over-
looked secrets to increasing the value of your portfolio. “If the new
thing you are considering purchasing is not better than what you al-
ready know is available,” says Charlie, “then it hasn’t met your thresh-
old. This screens out 99 percent of what you see.”21

The Decision to Sell: Two Good Reasons to Move Slowly
Focus investing is necessarily a long-term approach to investing. If we
were to ask Buffett what he considers an ideal holding period, he would
answer “forever”—so long as the company continues to generate above-
average economics and management allocates the earnings of the com-
pany in a rational manner. “Inactivity strikes us as intelligent behavior,”
he explains.22
     If you own a lousy company, you require turnover because other-
wise you end up owning the economics of a subpar business for a long
time. But if you own a superior company, the last thing you want to do
is to sell it.
     This slothlike approach to portfolio management may appear quirky
to those accustomed to actively buying and selling stocks on a regular
basis, but it has two important economic benefits, in addition to grow-
ing capital at an above-average rate:
174      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

      1. It works to reduce transaction costs. This is one of those com-
         monsense dynamics that is so obvious it is easily overlooked.
         Every time you buy or sell, you trigger brokerage costs that
         lower your net returns.
      2. It increases aftertax returns. When you sell a stock at a profit,
         you will be hit with capital gain taxes, eating into your profit.
         The solution: Leave it be. If you leave the gain in place (this is
         referred to as unrealized gain), your money compounds more
         forcefully. Overall, investors have too often underestimated the
         enormous value of this unrealized gain—what Buffett calls an
         “interest-free loan from the Treasury.”

     To make his point, Buffett asks us to imagine what happens if you
buy a $1 investment that doubles in price each year. If you sell the in-
vestment at the end of the first year, you would have a net gain of $.66
(assuming you’re in the 34 percent tax bracket). Now you reinvest the
$1.66, and it doubles in value by year-end. If the investment continues
to double each year, and you continue to sell, pay the tax, and reinvest
the proceeds, at the end of twenty years you would have a net gain of
$25,200 after paying taxes of $13,000. If, on the other hand, you pur-
chased a $1 investment that doubled each year and never sold it until the
end of twenty years, you would gain $692,000 after paying taxes of ap-
proximately $356,000.
     The best strategy for achieving high aftertax returns is to keep your
average portfolio turnover ratio somewhere between 0 and 20 percent.
Two strategies lend themselves best to low turnover rates. One is to
stick with an index mutual fund; they are low turnover by definition.
Those who prefer a more active style of investing will turn to the sec-
ond strategy: a focus portfolio.


THE CHALLENGE OF FOCUS INVESTING

My goal so far has been to lay out the argument for adopting the focus
investing approach that Warren Buffett uses with such great success. I
would be doing you less than full service if I did not also make it plain
that an unavoidable consequence of this approach is heightened volatil-
ity. When your portfolio is focused on just a few companies, a price
                                      M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o   175

change in any one of them is all the more noticeable and has greater
overall impact.
    The ability to withstand that volatility without undue second-
guessing is crucial to your peace of mind, and ultimately to your
financial success. Coming to terms with it is largely a matter of un-
derstanding the emotional side effects of investing, which is the topic
of Chapter 11.
    Money matters are about the most emotional issues of all, and that
will never change. But at the same time, you need not be constantly at
the mercy of those emotions, to the point that sensible action is handi-
capped. The key is to keep your emotions in appropriate perspective,
and that is much easier if you understand something of the basic psy-
chology involved.


THE CHALLENGE OF SUCCESS

Warren Buffett’s challenge is not psychology; he understands the emo-
tional side of investing as well as anyone and better than most. His chal-
lenge is maintaining the level of returns that others have come to expect
from him. Two factors are involved: First, in very recent years, Buffett
hasn’t found very many stocks that meet his price criteria. That’s a prob-
lem of the market. Second, when you’re driving a $100 billion company,
it takes a significant level of economic return to move the needle. That’s
a problem of size.
     Buffett explains it this way: “Some years back, a good $10 million
idea could do wonders for us. Today, the combination of ten such ideas
and a triple in the value of each would increase the net worth of Berk-
shire by only one quarter of one percent. We need ‘elephants’ to make
significant gains now—and they are hard to find.” 23 That was in early
2002. Berkshire’s net worth has continued to grow since then, and, pre-
sumably, these elephants are even harder to find today.
     The good news for most investors is that they can put their elephant
guns away. The other good news is that, regardless of the size of their
pocketbook, the fundamentals of focus investing still apply. No matter
how much money you have to work with, you will want to do the
same thing Buffett does: When you find a high-probability event, put
down a big bet.
                                  11

               The Psychology
                 of Money

T
      he study of what makes us all tick is endlessly fascinating. It is es-
      pecially intriguing to me that it plays such a strong role in invest-
      ing, a world that people generally perceive to be dominated by cold
numbers and soulless data. When it comes to investment decisions, our
behavior is sometimes erratic, often contradictory, and occasionally
goofy. Sometimes our illogical decisions are consistently illogical, and
sometimes no pattern is discernible. We make good decisions for inex-
plicable reasons, and bad decisions for no good reason at all.
     What is particularly alarming, and what all investors need to grasp,
is that they are often unaware of their bad decisions. To fully under-
stand the markets and investing, we have to understand our own irra-
tionalities. That is every bit as valuable to an investor as being able to
analyze a balance sheet and income statement.
     It is a complex, puzzling, intriguing study. Few aspects of human
existence are more emotion-laden than our relationship to money. And
the two emotions that drive decisions most profoundly are fear and
greed. Motivated by fear or greed, or both, investors frequently buy or
sell stocks at foolish prices, far above or below a company’s intrinsic
value. To say this another way, investor sentiment has a more pro-
nounced impact on stock prices than a company’s fundamentals.
     Much of what drives people’s decisions about stock purchases can
be explained only by principles of human behavior. And since the

                                                                       177
178     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

market is, by definition, the collective decisions made by all stock pur-
chasers, it is not an exaggeration to say that psychological forces push
and pull the entire market.
     Anyone who hopes to participate profitably in the market, therefore,
must allow for the impact of emotion. It is a two-sided issue: keeping
your own emotional profile under control as much as possible and being
alert for those times when other investors’ emotion-driven decisions
present you with a golden opportunity.



      Success in investing doesn’t correlate with IQ once you’re
      above the level of 125. Once you have ordinary intelligence,
      what you need is the temperament to control the urges that
      get other people into trouble in investing.1
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 1999



    The first step in properly weighting the impact of emotion in in-
vesting is understanding it. Fortunately, there is good information at
hand. In recent years, psychologists have turned their attention to how
established principles of human behavior play out when the dynamic is
money. This blending of economics and psychology is known as behav-
ioral finance, and it is just now moving down from the universities’
ivory towers to become part of the informed conversation among invest-
ment professionals—who, if they look over their shoulders, will find the
shadow of a smiling Ben Graham.


THE TEMPERAMENT OF A TRUE INVESTOR

Ben Graham, as we know, fiercely urged his students to learn the basic
difference between an investor and a speculator. The speculator, he said,
tries to anticipate and profit from price changes; the investor seeks only
to acquire companies at reasonable prices. Then he explained further:
The successful investor is often the person who has achieved a certain
temperament—calm, patient, rational. Speculators have the opposite
temperament: anxious, impatient, irrational. Their worst enemy is not
                                      The Psychology of Money          179

the stock market, but themselves. They may well have superior abilities
in mathematics, finance, and accounting, but if they cannot master
their emotions, they are ill suited to profit from the investment process.
    Graham understood the emotional quicksand of the market as well
as any modern psychologist, maybe better. His notion that true in-
vestors can be recognized by their temperament as well as by their skills
holds as true today as when first expressed.
    Investors have the following characteristics:

    • True investors are calm. They know that stock prices, inf luenced
by all manner of forces both reasonable and unreasonable, will fall as
well as rise, and that includes stocks they own. When that happens, they
react with equanimity; they know that as long as the company retains
the qualities that attracted them as investors in the first place, the price
will come back up. In the meantime, they do not panic.
    On this point, Buffett is blunt: Unless you can watch your stock
holdings decline by 50 percent without becoming panic-stricken, you
should not be in the stock market. In fact, he adds, as long as you feel
good about the businesses you own, you should welcome lower prices as
a way to profitably increase your holdings.
    At the opposite end of the spectrum, true investors also remain
calm in the face of what we might call the mob inf luence. When one
stock or one industry or one mutual fund suddenly lands in the spot-
light, the mob rushes in that direction. The trouble is, when everyone is
making the same choices because “everyone” knows it’s the thing to
do, then no one is in a position to profit. In remarks reported in For-
tune at the end of 1999, Buffett talked about the “can’t-miss-the-party”
factor that has infected so many bull-market investors.2 His caution
seems to be this: True investors don’t worry about missing the party;
they worry about coming to the party unprepared.
    • True investors are patient. Instead of being swept along in the en-
thusiasm of the crowd, true investors wait for the right opportunity.
They say no more often than yes. Buffett recalls that when he worked for
Graham-Newman, analyzing stocks for possible purchase, Ben Graham
turned down his recommendations most of the time. Graham, Buffett
says, was never willing to purchase a stock unless all the facts were in his
favor. From this experience, Buffett learned that the ability to say no is a
tremendous advantage for an investor.
180     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY



      We don’t have to be smarter than the rest; we have to be more
      disciplined than the rest.3
                                               WARREN BUFFETT, 2002




    Buffett believes that too many of today’s investors feel a need to pur-
chase too many stocks, most of which are certain to be mediocre, instead
of waiting for the few exceptional companies. To reinforce Graham’s les-
son, Buffett often uses the analogy of a punch card. “An investor,” he
says, “should act as though he had a lifetime decision card with just
twenty punches on it. With every investment decision his card is
punched, and he has one fewer available for the rest of his life.”4 If in-
vestors were restrained in this way, Buffett figures that they would be
forced to wait patiently until a great investment opportunity surfaced.
    • True investors are rational. They approach the market, and the
world, from a base of clear thinking. They are neither unduly pessimistic
nor irrationally optimistic; they are, instead, logical and rational.

     Buffett finds it odd that so many people habitually dislike markets
that are in their best interests and favor those markets that continually
put them at a disadvantage. They feel optimistic when market prices are
rising, pessimistic when prices are going down. If they go the next step
and put those feelings into action, what do they do? Sell at lower prices
and buy at higher prices—not the most profitable strategy.
     Undue optimism rears its head when investors blithely assume that
somehow the fates will smile on them and their stock choice will be the
one in a hundred that really takes off. It is especially prevalent in bull
markets, when high expectations are commonplace. Optimists see no
need to do the fundamental research and analysis that would illuminate
the real long-term winners (e.g., finding the few keepers among all the
look-alike dot-coms) because the short-term numbers are so seductive.
     Undue pessimism, whether directed at one company or the market
in general, motivates investors to sell at exactly the wrong time. In
Buffett’s view, true investors are pleased when the rest of the world turns
pessimistic, because they see it for what it really is: a perfect time to buy
                                     The Psychology of Money          181

good companies at bargain prices. Pessimism, he says, is “the most com-
mon cause of low prices. . . . We want to do business in such an environ-
ment, not because we like pessimism but because we like the prices it
produces. It’s optimism that is the enemy of the rational buyer.”5
     Whether an investor feels optimistic or pessimistic is a statement of
what that investor thinks about the future. Forecasting what is going to
happen next is tricky at best, and downright foolish when optimism (or
pessimism) is based more on emotion than on research. Buffett, who once
remarked that “the only value of stock forecasters is to make fortune
tellers look good,” makes no attempt to anticipate the periods in which
the market is likely to go up or down.6 Instead, he keeps an eye on the
general emotional tenor of the overall market, and acts accordingly. “We
simply attempt,” he explains, “to be fearful when others are greedy and to
be greedy only when others are fearful.”7


INTRODUCING MR. MARKET

To show his students how powerfully emotions are tied to stock mar-
ket f luctuations, and to help them recognize the folly of succumbing
to emotion, Graham created an allegorical character he named “Mr.
Market.” Buffett has frequently shared the story of Mr. Market with
Berkshire’s shareholders.
     Imagine that you and Mr. Market are partners in a private business.
Each day without fail, Mr. Market quotes a price at which he is willing
to either buy your interest or sell you his. The business that you both
own is fortunate to have stable economic characteristics, but Mr. Mar-
ket’s quotes are anything but. For you see, Mr. Market is emotionally
unstable. Some days, he is cheerful and enormously optimistic, and can
only see brighter days ahead. On these days, he offers a very high price
for shares in your business. At other times, Mr. Market is discouraged
and terribly pessimistic; seeing nothing but trouble ahead, he quotes a
very low price for your shares in the business.
     Mr. Market has another endearing characteristic, Graham said: He
does not mind being snubbed. If Mr. Market’s quotes are ignored, he
will be back again tomorrow with a new quote. Graham warned his
students that it is Mr. Market’s pocketbook, not his wisdom, that is use-
ful. If Mr. Market shows up in a foolish mood, you are free to ignore
182     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

him or take advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if you fall under
his inf luence.
     “The investor who permits himself to be stampeded or unduly wor-
ried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely trans-
forming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage,” Graham wrote.
“That man would be better off if his stocks had no market quotation at
all, for he would then be spared the mental anguish caused him by other
persons’ mistakes of judgment.”8
     To be successful, investors need good business judgment and the
ability to protect themselves from the emotional whirlwind that Mr.
Market unleashes. One is insufficient without the other. An important
factor in Buffett’s success is that he has always been able to disengage
himself from the emotional forces of the stock market. He credits Ben
Graham and Mr. Market with teaching him how to remain insulated
from the silliness of the market.


M R . M A R K E T, M E E T C H A R L I E M U N G E R

It was more than sixty years ago that Ben Graham introduced Mr.
Market, sixty years since he began writing about the irrationality that
exists in the market. Yet in all the years since, there has been little ap-
parent change in investor behavior. Investors still act irrationally. Foolish
mistakes are still the order of the day. Fear and greed still permeate the
marketplace.
    We can, through numerous academic studies and surveys, track in-
vestor foolishness. We can, if we follow Warren Buffett’s lead, turn
other people’s fear or greed to our advantage. But to fully understand
the dynamics of emotion in investing, we turn to another individual:
Charlie Munger.
    Munger’s understanding of how psychology affects investors, and
his insistence on taking it into account, have greatly inf luenced the
operations of Berkshire Hathaway. It is one of his most profound con-
tributions. In particular, he stresses what he calls the psychology of
misjudgment: What is it in human nature that draws people to mis-
takes of judgment?
    Munger believes a key problem is that our brain takes shortcuts in
analysis. We jump too quickly to conclusions. We are easily misled and
are prone to manipulation. To compensate, Munger has developed a
                                        The Psychology of Money            183


     I came to the psychology of misjudgment almost against my
     will; I rejected it until I realized my attitude was costing me a
     lot of money.9
                                                CHARLIE MUNGER, 1995



mental habit that has served him well. “Personally, I’ve gotten so that I
now use a kind of two-track analysis,” he said in a 1994 speech reprinted
in Outstanding Investor Digest. “First, what are the factors that really
govern the interests involved, rationally considered. And second, what
are the subconscious inf luences where the brain at a subconscious level is
automatically doing these things—which by and large are useful, but
which often misfunction.”10


B E H AV I O R A L F I N A N C E

In many ways, Charlie Munger is a genuine pioneer. He was thinking
about, and talking about, the psychological aspects of market behavior
long before other investment professionals gave it serious attention. But
that is beginning to change. Behavioral finance is now an accepted area
of study in the economics department at major universities, including
the work done by Richard Thaler at the University of Chicago.
    Observing that people often make foolish mistakes and illogical as-
sumptions when dealing with their own financial affairs, academics, in-
cluding Thaler, began to dig deeper into psychological concepts to explain
the irrationalities in people’s thinking. It is a relatively new field of study,
but what we are learning is fascinating, as well as eminently useful to
smart investors.

Overconfidence
Several psychological studies have pointed out that errors in judgment
occur because people in general are overconfident. Ask a large sample
of people how many believe their skills at driving a car are above av-
erage, and an overwhelming majority will say they are excellent driv-
ers. Another example: When asked, doctors believe they can diagnose
184     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

pneumonia with 90 percent confidence when in fact they are right only
50 percent of the time.
     Confidence per se is not a bad thing. But overconfidence is an-
other matter, and it can be particularly damaging when we are dealing
with our financial affairs. Overconfident investors not only make silly
decisions for themselves but also have a powerful effect on the market
as a whole.
     Overconfidence explains why so many investors make wrong calls.
They have too much confidence in the information they gather and
think they are more right than they actually are. If all the players think
that their information is correct and they know something that others
do not, the result is a great deal of trading.

Overreaction Bias
Thaler points to several studies that demonstrate people put too much
emphasis on a few chance events, thinking they spot a trend. In partic-
ular, investors tend to fix on the most recent information they received
and extrapolate from it; the last earnings report thus becomes in their
mind a signal of future earnings. Then, believing that they see what
others do not, they make quick decisions from superficial reasoning.
     Overconfidence is at work here; people believe they understand the
data more clearly than others do and interpret it better. But there is more
to it. Overreaction exacerbates overconfidence. The behaviorists have
learned that people tend to overreact to bad news and react slowly to good
news. Psychologists call this overreaction bias. Thus if the short-term
earnings report is not good, the typical investor response is an abrupt, ill-
considered overreaction, with its inevitable effect on stock prices.
     Thaler describes this overemphasis on the short term as investor
“myopia” (the medical term for nearsightedness) and believes most in-
vestors would be better off if they didn’t receive monthly statements. In
a study conducted with other behavioral economists, he proved his idea
in dramatic fashion.
     Thaler and colleagues asked a group of students to divide a hypo-
thetical portfolio between stocks and Treasury bills. But first, they sat
the students in front of a computer and simulated the returns of the
portfolio over a trailing twenty-five-year period. Half the students
were given mountains of information, representing the market’s
volatile nature with ever-changing prices. The other group was only
                                      The Psychology of Money          185

given periodic performance measured in five-year time periods. Thaler
then asked each group to allocate their portfolio for the next forty years.
    The group that had been bombarded by lots of information, some of
which inevitably pointed to losses, allocated only 40 percent of its
money to the stock market; the group that received only periodic infor-
mation allocated almost 70 percent of its portfolio to stocks. Thaler,
who lectures each year at the Behavioral Conference sponsored by the
National Bureau of Economic Research and the John F. Kennedy School
of Government at Harvard, told the group, “My advice to you is to in-
vest in equities and then don’t open the mail.”11
    This experiment, as well as others, neatly underscores Thaler’s no-
tion of investor myopia—shortsightedness leading to foolish decisions.
Part of the reason myopia provokes such an irrational response is an-
other bit of psychology: our innate desire to avoid loss.

Loss Aversion
According to behaviorists, the pain of a loss is far greater than the enjoy-
ment of a gain. Many experiments, by Thaler and others, have demon-
strated that people need twice as much positive to overcome a negative.
On a 50/50 bet, with precisely even odds, most people will not risk any-
thing unless the potential gain is twice as high as the potential loss.
     This is known as asymmetrical loss aversion: The downside has
a greater impact than the upside, and it is a fundamental aspect of
human psychology. Applied to the stock market, it means that investors
feel twice as bad about losing money as they feel good about picking
a winner.
     This aversion to loss makes investors unduly conservative, at great
cost. We all want to believe we made good decisions, so we hold onto
bad choices far too long in the vague hope that things will turn around.
By not selling our losers, we never have to confront our failures. But if
you don’t sell a mistake, you are potentially giving up a gain that you
could earn by reinvesting smartly.

Mental Accounting
A final aspect of behavioral finance that deserves our attention is what
psychologists have come to call mental accounting. It refers to our habit
of shifting our perspective on money as surrounding circumstances
186     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

change. We tend to mentally put money into different “accounts,” and
that determines how we think about using it.
     A simple situation will illustrate. Let us imagine that you have just
returned home from an evening out with your spouse. You reach for
your wallet to pay the babysitter, but discover that the $20 bill you
thought was there, is not. So, when you drive the sitter home, you stop
by an ATM and get another $20. Then the next day, you discover the
original $20 bill in your jacket pocket.
     If you’re like most people, you react with something like glee. The
$20 in the jacket is “found” money. Even though the first $20 and the
second $20 both came from your checking account, and both represent
money you worked hard for, the $20 bill you hold in your hand is money
you didn’t expect to have, and you feel free to spend it frivolously.
     Once again, Richard Thaler provides an interesting academic ex-
periment to demonstrate this concept. In his study, he started with two
groups of people. People in the first group were given $30 in cash and
told they had two choices: (1) They could pocket the money and walk
away, or (2) they could gamble on a coin f lip. If they won they would
get $9 extra and if they lost they would have $9 deducted. Most (70
percent) took the gamble because they figured at the very least they
would end up with $21 of found money. Those in the second group
were offered a different choice: (1) They could gamble on a coin toss—
if they won, they would get $39 and if they lost they would get $21; or
(2) they could get an even $30 with no coin toss. More than half (57
percent) decided to take the sure money. Both groups of people stood
to win the exact same amount of money with the exact same odds, but
they perceived the situation differently.12

Risk Tolerance
In the same way that a strong magnet pulls together all the nearby
pieces of metal, your level of risk tolerance pulls together all the ele-
ments of the psychology of finance. The psychological concepts are ab-
stract; where they get real is in the day-to-day decisions that you make
about buying and selling. And the common thread in all those decisions
is how you feel about risk.
    In the last dozen or so years, investment professionals have devoted
considerable energy to helping people assess their risk tolerance. At first,
                                     The Psychology of Money          187

it seemed like a simple task. By using interviews and questionnaires, they
could construct a risk profile for each investor. The trouble is, people’s
tolerance for risk is founded in emotion, and that means it changes with
changing circumstances. When the market declines drastically, even
those with an aggressive profile will become very cautious. In a booming
market, supposedly conservative investors add more stocks just as quickly
as aggressive investors do.
     A true picture of risk tolerance requires digging below the surface
of the standard assessment questions and investigating issues driven by
psychology. A few years ago, in collaboration with Dr. Justin Green of
Villanova University, I developed a risk analysis tool that focuses on
personality as much as on the more obvious and direct risk factors.
     Summarizing our research, we found that propensity for risk taking
is connected to two demographic factors: gender and age. Women are
typically more cautious than men, and older people are less willing to
assume risk than younger people. Looking at personality factors, we
learned that the investor with a high degree of risk tolerance will be
someone who sets goals and believes he or she has control of the envi-
ronment and can affect its outcome. This person sees the stock market
as a contingency dilemma in which information combined with ra-
tional choices will produce winning results.
     For investors, the implications of behavioral finance are clear: How
we decide to invest, and how we choose to manage those investments,
has a great deal to do with how we think about money. Mental ac-
counting has been suggested as a further reason people don’t sell stocks
that are doing badly: In their minds, the loss doesn’t become real until
they act on it. Another powerful connection has to do with risk. We are
far more likely to take risks with found money. On a broader scale,
mental accounting emphasizes one weakness of the efficient market hy-
pothesis: It demonstrates that market values are determined not solely
by the aggregated information but also by how human beings process
that information.


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FOCUS INVESTING

Everything we have learned about psychology and investing comes
together in the person of Warren Buffett. He puts his faith in his
188      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

own research, rather than in luck. His actions derive from carefully
thought-out goals, and he is not swept off course by short-term events.
He understands the true elements of risk and accepts the consequences
with confidence.
    Long before behavioral finance had a name, it was understood and
accepted by a few renegades like Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger.
Charlie points out that when he and Buffett left graduate school, they
“entered the business world to find huge, predictable patterns of ex-
treme irrationality.”13 He is not talking about predicting the timing,
but rather the idea that when irrationality does occur it leads to pre-
dictable patterns of subsequent behavior.
    When it comes to investing, emotions are very real, in the sense
that they affect people’s behavior and thus ultimately affect market
prices. You have already sensed, I am sure, two reasons understanding
the human dynamic is so valuable in your own investing:

      1. You will have guidelines to help you avoid the most common
         mistakes.
      2. You will be able to recognize other people’s mistakes in time to
         profit from them.

    All of us are vulnerable to individual errors of judgment that can
affect our personal success. When a thousand or a million people make
errors of judgment, the collective impact is to push the market in a
destructive direction. Then, so strong is the temptation to follow the
crowd, accumulated bad judgment only compounds itself. In a turbu-
lent sea of irrational behavior, the few who act rationally may well be
the only survivors.
    Successful focus investors need a certain kind of temperament. The
road is always bumpy, and knowing the right path to take is often coun-
terintuitive. The stock market’s constant gyrations can be unsettling to
investors and make them act in irrational ways. You need to be on the
lookout for these emotions and be prepared to act sensibly even when
your instincts may strongly call for the opposite behavior. But as we have
learned, the future rewards focus investing significantly enough to war-
rant our strong effort.
                                 12

     The Unreasonable Man


G
       eorge Bernard Shaw wrote, “The reasonable man adapts himself
       to the world. The unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the
       world to himself. Therefore all progress depends on the unrea-
sonable man.”1
     Shall we conclude that Buffett is “the unreasonable man”? To do so,
we must presume that his investment approach represents progress in the
financial world, an assumption I freely make. For when we look at the
recent achievements of the “reasonable” men, we see at best unevenness,
at worst disaster.
     The 1980s are likely to be remembered as the Future Shock decade
of financial management. Program trading, leveraged buyouts, junk
bonds, derivative securities, and index futures frightened many in-
vestors. The distinctions between money managers faded. The grind of
fundamental research was replaced by the whirl of computers. Black
boxes replaced management interviews and investigation. Automation
replaced intuition.
     The late 1990s were, if anything, worse. That frenzied, overvalued
marketplace phenomenon generally known as the dot-com boom went
disastrously bust. Warren Buffett called it “The Great Bubble.” And we
all know what happens to bubbles when they get too big—they burst,
dripping sticky residue on everyone within range.
     Many investors have become disenchanted and estranged from the
financial marketplace. The residue of the three-year bear market of
2000 through 2002 left many with a particularly bitter taste in their

                                                                     189
190      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

mouths. Even now, with so many money managers unable to add value
to client portfolios, it is easy to understand why passive investing has
gained popularity.
     Throughout the past few decades, investors have f lirted with many
different investment approaches. Periodically, small capitalization, large
capitalization, growth, value, momentum, thematic, and sector rotation
have proven financially rewarding. At other times, these approaches have
stranded their followers in periods of mediocrity. Buffett, the exception,
has not suffered periods of mediocrity. His investment performance,
widely documented, has been consistently superior. As investors and
speculators alike have been distracted by esoteric approaches to investing,
Buffett has quietly amassed a multi-billion-dollar fortune. Throughout,
businesses have been his tools, common sense his philosophy.
     How did he do it?
     Given the documented success of Buffett’s performance coupled
with the simplicity of his methodology, the more appropriate question
is, why don’t other investors apply his approach? The answer may lie in
how people think about investing.
     When Buffett invests, he sees a business. Most investors see only a
stock price. They spend far too much time and effort watching, predict-
ing, and anticipating price changes and far too little time understanding
the business they are part owner of. Elementary as this may be, it is the
root that distinguishes Buffett.



      Stocks are simple. All you do is buy shares in a great business
      for less than the business is intrinsically worth, with manage-
      ment of the highest integrity and ability. Then you own those
      shares forever.2
                                                WARREN BUFFETT, 1990




    While other professional investors are busy studying capital asset
pricing models, beta, and modern portfolio theory, Buffett studies
income statements, capital reinvestment requirements, and the cash-
generating capabilities of his companies. His hands-on experience with
                                         The Unreasonable Man          191

a wide variety of businesses in many industries separates Buffett from
all other professional investors. “Can you really explain to a fish what
it’s like to walk on land?” Buffett asks. “One day on land is worth a
thousand years of talking about it and one day running a business has
exactly the same kind of value.”3
     According to Buffett, the investor and the businessperson should
look at the company in the same way, because they both want essentially
the same thing. The businessperson wants to buy the entire company
and the investor wants to buy portions of the company. Theoretically,
the businessperson and the investor, to earn a profit, should be looking at
the same variables.
     If adapting Buffett’s investment strategy required only changing
perspective, then probably more investors would become proponents.
However, applying Buffett’s approach requires changing not only per-
spective but also how performance is evaluated and communicated. The
traditional yardstick for measuring performance is price change: the
difference between what you originally paid for a stock and its market
price today.
     In the long run, the market price of a stock should approximate the
change in value of the business. However, in the short run, prices can
swoop widely above and below a company’s value for any number of il-
logical reasons. The problem remains that most investors use these
short-term price changes to gauge the success or failure of their invest-
ment approach, even though the changes often have little to do with
the changing economic value of the business and much to do with an-
ticipating the behavior of other investors.
     To make matters worse, clients require professional money to report
performance in quarterly periods. Knowing that they must improve
short-term performance or risk losing clients, professional investors be-
come obsessed with chasing stock prices.




    The market is there only as a reference point to see if anybody
    is offering to do anything foolish.4
                                              WARREN BUFFETT, 1988
192      T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

    Buffett believes it is foolish to use short-term prices to judge a com-
pany’s success. Instead, he lets his companies report their value to him
by their economic progress. Once a year, he checks several variables:

      • Return on beginning shareholder’s equity
      • Change in operating margins, debt levels, and capital expendi-
        ture needs
      • The company’s cash-generating ability

    If these economic measurements are improving, he knows the share
price, over the long term, should ref lect this. What happens to the stock
price in the short run is inconsequential.


I N V E S T I N G T H E WA R R E N B U F F E T T WAY

The major goal of this book is to help investors understand and employ
the investment strategies that have made Buffett successful. It is my
hope that, having learned from his past experiences, you will be able to
go forward and apply his methods. Perhaps in the future you may see
examples of “Buffett-like” purchases and will be in a position to profit
from his teachings.
    For instance . . .

      • When the stock market forces the price of a good business
        downward, as it did to the Washington Post, or
      • When a specific risk temporarily punishes a business, as it did
        Wells Fargo, or
      • When investor indifference allows a superior business such as
        Coca-Cola to be priced at half of its intrinsic value

. . . investors who know how to think and act like Buffett will be
rewarded.
      The Warren Buffett Way is deceptively simple. There are no com-
puter programs to learn, no cumbersome investment banking manuals
to decipher. There is nothing scientific about valuing a business and
then paying a price that is below this business value. “What we do is not
beyond anybody else’s competence,” says Buffett. “It is just not neces-
sary to do extraordinary things to get extraordinary results.”5
                                           The Unreasonable Man          193

     The irony is that Buffett’s success lies partly in the failure of others.
“It has been helpful to me,” he explains, “to have tens of thousands (stu-
dents) turned out of business schools taught that it didn’t do any good to
think.”6 I do not mean to imply that Buffett is average, far from it. He
is unquestionably brilliant. But the gap between Buffett and other pro-
fessional investors is widened by their own willingness to play a loser’s
game that Buffett chooses not to play. Readers of this book have the
same choice.
     Whether you are financially able to purchase 10 percent of a com-
pany or merely one hundred shares, the Warren Buffett Way can help you
achieve profitable investment returns. But this approach will help only
those investors who are willing to help themselves. To be successful, you
must be willing to do some thinking on your own. If you need constant
affirmation, particularly from the stock market, that your investment de-
cisions are correct, you will diminish your benefits. But if you can think
for yourself, apply relatively simple methods, and have the courage of
your convictions, you will greatly increase your chances for profit.
     Whenever people try something new, there is initial apprehension.
Adopting a new and different investment strategy will naturally evoke
some uneasiness. In the Warren Buffett Way, the first step is the most
challenging. If you can master this first step, the rest of the way is easy.

Step One: Turn off the Stock Market
Remember that the stock market is manic-depressive. Sometimes it is
wildly excited about future prospects, and at other times it is unreason-
ably depressed. Of course, this behavior creates opportunities, particu-
larly when shares of outstanding businesses are available at irrationally
low prices. But just as you would not take direction from an advisor who
exhibited manic-depressive tendencies, neither should you allow the
market to dictate your actions.
     The stock market is not a preceptor; it exists merely to assist you
with the mechanics of buying or selling shares of stock. If you believe
that the stock market is smarter than you are, give it your money by in-
vesting in index funds. But if you have done your homework and un-
derstand your business and are confident that you know more about
your business than the stock market does, turn off the market.
     Buffett does not have a stock quote machine in his office and he
seems to get by just fine without it. If you plan on owning shares in an
194     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

outstanding business for a number of years, what happens in the market
on a day-to-day basis is inconsequential. You do need to check in regu-
larly, to see if something has happened that presents you with a nifty
opportunity, but you will find that your portfolio weathers nicely even
if you do not look constantly at the market.
     “After we buy a stock, we would not be disturbed if markets closed
for a year or two,” says Buffett. “We don’t need a daily quote on our
100 percent position in See’s or H.H. Brown to validate our well being.
Why, then, should we need a quote on our 7 percent interest [today,
more than 8 percent] in Coke?”7
     Buffett is telling us that he does not need the market’s prices to vali-
date Berkshire’s common stock investments. The same holds true for in-
dividual investors. You know you have approached Buffett’s level when
your attention turns to the stock market and the only question on your
mind is: “Has anybody done anything foolish lately that will give me an
opportunity to buy a good business at a great price?”

Step Two: Don’t Worry about the Economy
Just as people spend fruitless hours worrying about the stock market
so, too, do they worry needlessly about the economy. If you find
yourself discussing and debating whether the economy is poised for
growth or tilting toward a recession, whether interest rates are mov-
ing up or down, or whether there is inf lation or disinf lation, STOP!
Give yourself a break.
    Often investors begin with an economic assumption and then go
about selecting stocks that fit neatly within this grand design. Buffett
considers this thinking to be foolish. First, no one has economic predic-
tive powers any more than they have stock market predictive powers.
Second, if you select stocks that will benefit by a particular economic en-
vironment, you inevitably invite turnover and speculation, as you contin-
uously adjust your portfolio to benefit in the next economic scenario.
    Buffett prefers to buy a business that has the opportunity to profit
in any economy. Macroeconomic forces may affect returns on the mar-
gin, but overall, Buffett’s businesses are able to profit nicely despite va-
garies in the economy. Time is more wisely spent locating and owning
a business that can profit in all economic environments than by renting
a group of stocks that do well only if a guess about the economy hap-
pens to be correct.
                                           The Unreasonable Man           195

Step Three: Buy a Business, Not a Stock
Let’s pretend that you have to make a very important decision. Tomor-
row you will have an opportunity to pick one business to invest in. To
make it interesting, let’s also pretend that once you have made your deci-
sion, you can’t change it and, furthermore, you have to hold the invest-
ment for ten years. Ultimately, the wealth generated from this business
ownership will support you in your retirement. Now, what are you going
to think about?
    Probably many questions will run through your mind, bringing a
great deal of confusion. But if Buffett were given the same test, he
would begin by methodically measuring the business against his basic
tenets, one by one:

    • Is the business simple and understandable, with a consistent oper-
      ating history and favorable long-term prospects?
    • Is it run by honest and competent managers, who allocate capital
      rationally, communicate candidly with shareholders, and resist the
      institutional imperative?
    • Are the company’s economics in good shape—with high
      profit margins, owners’ earnings, and increased market value that
      matches retained earnings?
    • Finally, is it available at a discount to its intrinsic value? Take note:
      Only at this final step does Buffett look at the stock market price.

     Calculating the value of a business is not mathematically complex.
However, problems arise when we wrongly estimate a company’s fu-
ture cash f low. Buffett deals with this problem in two ways. First, he
increases his chances of correctly predicting future cash f lows by stick-
ing with businesses that are simple and stable in character. Second, he
insists on a margin of safety between the company’s purchase price and
its determined value. This margin of safety helps create a cushion that
will protect him—and you—from companies whose future cash f lows
are changing.


Step Four: Manage a Portfolio of Businesses
Now that you are a business owner as opposed to a renter of stocks, the
composition of your portfolio will change. Because you are no longer
196     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

measuring your success solely by price change or comparing annual price
change to a common stock benchmark, you have the liberty to select the
best businesses available. There is no law that says you must include every
major industry within your portfolio, nor do you have to include 30, 40,
or 50 stocks in your portfolio to achieve adequate diversification.
    Buffett believes that wide diversification is required only when in-
vestors do not understand what they are doing. If these “know-nothing”
investors want to own common stocks, they should simply put their
money in an index fund. But for the “know-something” investors, con-
ventional diversification into dozens of stocks makes little sense. Buffett
asks you to consider: If the best business you own presents the least fi-
nancial risk and has the most favorable long-term prospects, why would
you put money into your twentieth favorite business instead of adding
money to the top choice?
    Now that you are managing a portfolio of businesses, many things
begin to change. First, you are less likely to sell your best businesses just
because they are returning a profit. Second, you will pick new businesses
for purchase with much greater care. You will resist the temptation to
purchase a marginal company just because you have cash reserves. If the
company does not pass your tenet screen, don’t purchase it. Be patient
and wait for the right business. It is wrong to assume that if you’re not
buying and selling, you’re not making progress. In Buffett’s mind, it is
too difficult to make hundreds of smart decisions in a lifetime. He would
rather position his portfolio so he only has to make a few smart decisions.

The Essence of Warren Buffett
The driving force of Warren Buffett’s investment strategy is the rational
allocation of capital. Determining how to allocate a company’s earnings
is the most important decision a manager will make. Rationality—dis-
playing rational thinking when making that choice—is the quality Buf-
fett most admires. Despite underlying vagaries, a line of reason permeates
the financial markets. Buffett’s success is the result of locating that line of
reason and never deviating from its path.
     Buffett has had his share of failures and no doubt will have a few
more in the years ahead. But investment success is not synonymous with
infallibility, but it comes about by doing more things right than wrong.
The Warren Buffett Way is no different. Its success depends as much on
                                         The Unreasonable Man          197

eliminating those things you can get wrong, which are many and per-
plexing (predicting markets, economies, and stock prices), as on getting
things right, which are few and simple (valuing a business).
    When Buffett purchases stocks, he focuses on two simple variables:
the price of the business and its value. The price of a business can be
found by looking up its quote. Determining value requires some calcula-
tion, but it is not beyond the comprehension of those willing to do some
homework.



    Investing is not that complicated. You need to know account-
    ing, the language of business. You should read The Intelligent
    Investor. You need the right mind-set, the right temperament.
    You should be interested in the process and be in your circle of
    competence. Read Ben Graham and Phil Fisher, read annual
    reports and trade reports, but don’t do equations with Greek
    letters in them.8
                                              WARREN BUFFETT, 1993




     Because you no longer worry about the stock market, the economy,
or predicting stock prices, you are now free to spend more time under-
standing your businesses. You can spend more productive time reading
annual reports and business and industry articles that will improve your
knowledge as an owner. In fact, the more willing you are to investigate
your own business, the less dependent you will be on others who make
a living advising people to take irrational action.
     Ultimately, the best investment ideas will come from doing your
own homework. However, you should not feel intimidated. The Warren
Buffett Way is not beyond the comprehension of most serious investors.
You do not have to become an MBA-level authority on business valua-
tion to use it successfully. Still, if you are uncomfortable applying these
tenets yourself, nothing prevents you from asking your financial advisor
these same questions. In fact, the more you enter into a dialogue on
price and value, the more you will begin to understand and appreciate
the Warren Buffett Way.
198     T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

     Buffett, over his lifetime, has tried different investment gambits. At a
young age he even tried his hand at stock charting. He has studied with
the brightest financial mind of the twentieth century, Benjamin Graham,
and managed and owned a host of businesses with his partner, Charlie
Munger. Over the past five decades, Buffett has experienced double-digit
interest rates, hyperinf lation, and stock market crashes. Through all the
distractions, he found his niche, that point where all things make sense:
where investment strategy cohabits with personality. “Our (investment)
attitude,” said Buffett, “fits our personalities and the way we want to live
our lives.”6
     Buffett’s attitude easily ref lects this harmony. He is always upbeat
and supportive. He is genuinely excited about coming to work every day.
“I have in life all I want right here,” he says. “I love every day. I mean, I
tap dance in here and work with nothing but people I like.”7 “There is
no job in the world,” he says, “that is more fun than running Berkshire
and I count myself lucky to be where I am.”8
                     Afterword
                Managing Money the
                Warren Buffett Way



I
  began my money management career at Legg Mason in the summer of
  1984. It was a typical hot and humid day in Baltimore. Fourteen newly
  minted investment brokers, including myself, walked into an open-
windowed conference room to begin our training. Sitting down at our
desks, we all received a copy of The Intelligent Investor by Benjamin
Graham (a book I had never heard of ) and a photocopy of the 1983
Berkshire Hathaway annual report (a company I had never heard of )
written by Warren Buffett (a man I had never heard of ).
     The first day of class included introductions and welcomes from top
management, including some of the firm’s most successful brokers. One
after another, they proudly explained that Legg Mason’s investment
philosophy was 100 percent value-based. Clutching The Intelligent In-
vestor, each took a turn at reciting chapter and verse from this holy
text. Buy stocks with low price-to-earnings ratios (P/E), low price-to-
book value, and high dividends, they said. Don’t pay attention to the
stock market’s daily gyrations, they said; its siren song would almost
certainly pull you in the wrong direction. Seek to become a contrarian,
they said. Buy stocks that are down in price and unpopular so you can
later sell them at higher prices when they again become popular.

                                                                    199
200     AFTERWORD

     The message we received throughout the first day was both consis-
tent and logical. We spent the afternoon analyzing Value Line research
reports and learning to distinguish between stocks that were down in
price and appeared to be cheap and stocks that were up in price and ap-
peared to be expensive. By the end of our first training session, we all be-
lieved we were in possession of the Holy Grail of investing. As we packed
up our belongings, our instructor reminded us to take the Berkshire
Hathaway annual report with us and read it before tomorrow’s class.
“Warren Buffett,” she cheerily reminded us, “was Benjamin Graham’s
most famous student, you know.”
     Back in my hotel room that night, I was wrung out with exhaus-
tion. My eyes were blurry and tired, and my head was swimming with
balance sheets, income statements, and accounting ratios. Quite hon-
estly, the last thing I wanted to do was to spend another hour or so read-
ing an annual report. I was sure if one more investing factoid reached my
inner skull, it would certainly explode. Reluctantly and very tiredly, I
picked up the Berkshire Hathaway report.
     It began with a salutation To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hath-
away Inc. Here Buffett outlined the company’s major business princi-
ples: “Our long-term economic goal is to maximize the average annual
rate of gain in intrinsic value on a per share basis,” he wrote. “Our pref-
erence would be to reach this goal by directly owning a diversified group
of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn above-average re-
turns on capital.” He promised, “We will be candid in our reporting to
you, emphasizing the pluses and minuses important in appraising business
value. Our guideline is to tell you the business facts that we would want
to know if our positions were reversed.”
     The next fourteen pages outlined Berkshire’s major business holdings
including Nebraska Furniture Mart, Buf falo Evening News, See’s Candy
Shops, and the Government Employees Insurance Company. And true to
his word, Buffett proceeded to tell me everything I would want to know
about the economics of these businesses, and more. He listed the common
stocks held in Berkshire’s insurance portfolio, including Affiliated Publi-
cations, General Foods, Ogilvy & Mather, R.J. Reynolds Industries, and
the Washington Post. I was immediately struck by how seamlessly
Buffett moved back and forth between describing the stocks in the port-
folio and the business attributes of Berkshire’s major holdings. It was as if
the analyses of stocks and of businesses were one and the same.
                                                      Afterword       201

     Granted, I had spent the entire day in class analyzing stocks, which
I knew were partial ownership interests in businesses, but I had not
made this most important analytical connection. When I studied Value
Line reports I saw accounting numbers and financial ratios. When I
read the Berkshire Hathaway report I saw businesses, with products and
customers. I saw economics and cash earnings. I saw competitors and
capital expenditures. Perhaps I should have seen all that when I analyzed
the Value Line reports, but for whatever reason, it did not resonate in
the same way. As I continued to read the Berkshire report, the entire
world of investing, which was still somewhat mysterious to me, began
to open. That night, in one epiphanic moment, Warren Buffett revealed
the inner nature of investing.
     The next morning, I was bursting with a newly discovered passion
for investing, and when the training class was completed, I quickly re-
turned to Philadelphia with a single-minded purpose: I was going to in-
vest my clients’ money in the same fashion as did Warren Buffett.
     I knew I needed to know more, so I started building a file of
background information. First I obtained all the back copies of Berk-
shire Hathaway annual reports. Then I ordered the annual reports of
all the publicly traded companies Buffett had invested with. Then I
collected all the magazine and newspaper articles on Warren Buffett I
could find.
     When the file was as complete as I could get it, I dove in. My goal
was to first become an expert on Warren Buffett and then share those
insights with my clients.
     Over the ensuing years, I built a respectable investment business. By
following Buffett’s teachings and stock picks, I achieved for my clients
more investment success than failure. Most of my clients intellectually
bought into the approach of thinking about stocks as businesses and try-
ing to buy the best businesses at a discount. The few clients who did not
stick around left not because the Buffett approach was unsound, but be-
cause being contrarian was too much of an emotional challenge. And
a few left simply because they did not have enough patience to see the
process succeed. They were impatient for activity, and the constant itch
to do something—anything—drove them off the track. Looking back,
I don’t believe I dealt with anyone who openly disagreed with the logic
of Buffett’s investment approach, yet there were several who could not
get the psychology right.
202    AFTERWORD

     All the while, I continued to collect Buffett data. Annual reports,
magazine articles, interviews—anything having to do with Warren
Buffett and Berkshire Hathaway, I read, analyzed, and filed. I was like a
kid following a ballplayer. He was my hero, and each day I tried to
swing the bat like Warren.
     As the years passed, I had a growing and powerful urge to become a
full-time portfolio manager. At the time, investment brokers were com-
pensated on their purchases and sales; it was largely a commission-based
system. As a broker, I was getting the “buy” part of the equation right,
but Buffett’s emphasis on holding stocks for the long-term made the
“sell” part of the equation more difficult. Today, most financial service
businesses allow investment brokers and financial advisors to manage
money for their clients for a fee instead of a commission—if they choose.
Eventually I met several portfolio managers who were compensated for
performance regardless of whether they did a lot of buying or selling.
This arrangement appeared to me to be the perfect environment in
which to apply Buffett’s teachings.
     Initially, I gained some portfolio management experience at a local
bank trust department in Philadelphia, and along the way obtained the
obligatory Chartered Financial Analyst designation. Later, I joined a
small investment counseling firm where I managed client portfolios for a
fee. Our objective was to help our clients achieve a reasonable rate of re-
turn within an acceptable level of risk. Most had already achieved their
financial goals, and now they wanted to preserve their wealth. Because of
this, many of the portfolios in our firm were balanced between stocks
and bonds.
     It was here that I began to put my thoughts about Buffett down
on paper, to share with our clients the wisdom of his investment ap-
proach. After all, Buffett, who had been investing for forty years, had
built up a pretty nice nest egg; learning more about how he did it cer-
tainly couldn’t hurt. These collected writings ultimately became the
basis for The Warren Buf fett Way.
     The decision to start an equity mutual fund based on the principles
described in The Warren Buf fett Way came from two directions.
First, our investment counseling firm needed an instrument to manage
those accounts that were not large enough to warrant a separately man-
aged portfolio. Second, I wanted to establish a discretionary perfor-
mance record that was based on the teachings of the book. I wanted to
                                                        Afterword      203

demonstrate that what Buffett had taught and what I had written, if
followed, would allow an investor to generate market-beating returns.
The proof would be in the performance.
     The new fund was established on April 17, 1995. Armed with the
knowledge gained by having studied Warren Buffett for over ten years,
coupled with the experience of managing portfolios for seven of those
years, I felt we were in a great position to help our clients achieve
above-average results. Instead, what we got was two very mediocre
years of investment performance.
     What happened?
     As I analyzed the portfolio and the stock market during this pe-
riod, I discovered two important but separate explanations. First, when
I started the fund, I populated the portfolio mostly with Berkshire
Hathaway-type stocks: newspapers, beverage companies, other con-
sumer nondurable businesses, and selected financial service companies.
I even bought shares of Berkshire Hathaway.
     Because my fund was a laboratory example of Buffett’s teachings,
perhaps it was not surprising that many of the stocks in the portfolio
were stocks Buffett himself had purchased. But the difference between
Buffett’s stocks in the 1980s and those same stocks in 1997 was
striking. Many of the companies that had consistently grown owner
earnings at a double-digit rate in the 1980s were slowing to a high single-
digit rate in the late 1990s. In addition, the stock prices of these com-
panies had steadily risen over the decade and so the discount to intrinsic
value was smaller compared with the earlier period. When the econom-
ics of your business slow and the discount to intrinsic value narrows, the
future opportunity for outsized investment returns diminishes.
     If the first factor was lack of high growth level inside the portfolio,
the second factor was what happening outside the portfolio. At the
same time that the economics of the businesses in the fund were
slowing, the economics of certain technology companies—telecommu-
nications, software, and Internet service providers—were sharply ac-
celerating. Because these new industries were taking a larger share of
the market capitalization of the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index, the stock
market itself was rising at a faster clip. What I soon discovered was that
the economics of what I owned in the fund were no match for the
newer, more powerful technology-based companies then revving up in
the stock market.
204    AFTERWORD

     In 1997, my fund was at the crossroads. If I continued to invest in
the traditional Buffett-like stocks, it was likely I would continue to gen-
erate just average results. Even Buffett was telling Berkshire Hathaway
shareholders they could no longer expect to earn the above-average in-
vestment gains the company had achieved in the past. I knew if I contin-
ued to own the same stocks Buffett owned in his portfolio at these
elevated prices, coupled with moderating economics, I was unlikely to
generate above-average investment results for my shareholders. And in
that case, what was the purpose? If a mutual fund cannot generate, over
time, investment results better than the broad market index, then its
shareholders would be better off in an index mutual fund.
     Standing at the investment crossroads during this period was dra-
matic. There were questions about whether the fund should continue.
There were questions about whether Buffett could compete against the
newer industries and still provide above-average results. And there was
the meta-question of whether the whole philosophy of thinking about
stocks as businesses was a relevant approach when analyzing the newer
technology-oriented industries.
     I knew in my heart that the Buffett approach to investing was still
valid. I knew without question that this business-analytical approach
would still provide the opportunity for investors to spot mispricing and
thus profit from the market’s narrower view. I knew all these things
and more, yet I momentarily hesitated at the shoreline, unable to cross
into the new economic landscape.
     I was fortunate to become friends with Bill Miller when I first
began my career at Legg Mason. At the time, Bill was comanaging a
value fund with Ernie Kiehne. Bill periodically spent time with the
newer investment brokers sharing his thoughts about the stock market,
about companies, and ideas from the countless books he had read. After
I left Legg Mason to become a portfolio manager, Bill and I remained
friends. After The Warren Buf fett Way was published, we circled back
for more intense discussions about investing and the challenges of navi-
gating the economic landscape.
     In the book, I pointed out that Buffett did not rely solely on low
P/E ratios to select stocks. The driving force in value creation was
owner earnings and a company’s ability to generate above-average
returns on capital. Sometimes a stock with a low P/E ratio did generate
cash and achieve high returns on capital and subsequently became a great
investment. Other times, a stock with a low P/E ratio consumed cash
206    AFTERWORD

     Back then Microsoft was a $22 billion business that most value in-
vestors thought was significantly overvalued. By the end of 2003, Micro-
soft had grown to a $295 billion business. The company went up in price
over 1,000 percent, while the S&P 500 Index advanced 138 percent dur-
ing the same time period.
     Was Microsoft a value stock in 1993? It certainly looks like it was,
yet no value investor would touch it. Is eBay a value stock today? We
obviously believe it is, but we will not know for certain for some years
to come. But one thing is clear to us: You cannot determine whether
eBay is a value stock by looking at its P/E any more than you could de-
termine Microsoft’s valuation by looking at its P/E.
     At the heart of all Bill’s investment decisions is the requirement of
understanding a company’s business model. What are the value creators?
How does the company generate cash? What level of cash can a company
produce and what rate of growth can it expect to achieve? What is the
company’s return on capital? If it achieves a return above the cost of cap-
ital, the company is creating value. If it achieves a rate of return below
the cost of capital, the company is destroying value.
     In the end, Bill’s analysis gives him a sense of what the business is
worth, based largely on the discounted present value of the company’s
future cash earnings. Although Bill’s fund owns companies that are dif-
ferent from those in Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway portfolio, no one can
deny that they are approaching the investment process in the same way.
The only difference is that Bill has decided to take the investment phi-
losophy and apply it to the New Economy franchises that are rapidly
dominating the global economic landscape.
     When Bill asked me to join Legg Mason Capital Management and
bring my fund along, it was clear to me our philosophical approach was
identical. The more important advantage of joining Bill’s team was that
now I was part of an organization that was dedicated to applying a
business-valuation approach to investing wherever value-creation op-
portunities appeared. I was no longer limited to looking at just the
stocks Buffett had purchased. The entire stock market was now open
for analysis. I guess you could say it forced me to expand my circle of
competence.
     One of my earliest thinking errors in managing my fund was the
mistaken belief that because Buffett did not own high-tech com-
panies, these businesses must have been inherently unanalyzable. Yes,
                                                         Afterword      207

these newly created businesses possessed more economic risk than
many of the companies Buffett owned. The economics of soda pop,
razor blades, carpets, paint, candy, and furniture are much easier to
predict than the economics of computer software, telecommunica-
tions, and the Internet.
     But “difficult to predict” is not the same as “impossible to ana-
lyze.” Certainly the economics of a technology company are more
variant than those of consumer nondurable businesses. But a thought-
ful study of how any business operates should still allow us to deter-
mine a range of valuation possibilities. And keeping with the Buffett
philosophy, it is not critical that we determine precisely what the
value of the company is, only that we are buying the company at a sig-
nificant price discount (margin of safety) from the range of valuation
possibilities.
     What some Buffettologists miss in their thinking is that the payoff
of being right in the analysis of technology companies more than
compensates for the risk. All we must do is analyze each stock as a
business, determine the value of the business and, to protect against
higher economic risk, demand a greater margin of safety in the pur-
chase price.
     We should not forget that over the years many devotees of Warren
Buffett’s investment approach have taken his philosophy and applied it to
different parts of the stock market. Several prominent investors have
bought stocks not found anywhere in Berkshire’s portfolio. Others have
bought smaller-capitalization stocks. A few have taken Buffett’s approach
into the international market and purchased foreign securities. The im-
portant takeaway is this: Buffett’s investment approach is applicable to all
types of businesses, regardless of industry, regardless of market capitaliza-
tion, regardless of where the business is domiciled.
     Since becoming part of Legg Mason Capital Management in 1998,
my growth fund has enjoyed a remarkable period of superior invest-
ment performance. The reason for this much better performance is not
that the philosophy or process changed, but that the philosophy and
process were applied to a larger universe of stocks. When portfolio
managers and analysts are willing to study all types of business models,
regardless of industry classification, the opportunity to exploit the mar-
ket’s periodic mispricing greatly expands, and this translates into better
returns for our shareholders.
208      AFTERWORD

     This does not mean we do not have an occasional bad year, bad
quarter, or bad month. It simply means when you add up all the times
we lost money relative to the market, using any time period, the amount
of money we lost was smaller than the amount of money we made when
we outperformed the market.
     In this respect, the record of this fund is not far different from other
focused portfolios. Think back to the performance of Charlie Munger,
Bill Ruane, and Lou Simpson. Each one achieved outstanding long-
term performance but endured periods of short-term underperfor-
mance. Each one employed a business valuation process to determine
whether stocks were mispriced. Each one ran concentrated, low-
turnover portfolios. The process they used enabled them to achieve su-
perior long-term results at the expense of a higher standard deviation.
     Michael Mauboussin, the chief investment strategist at Legg Mason
Capital Management, conducted a study of the best-performing mutual
funds between 1992 and 2002.1 He screened for funds that had one
manager during the period, had assets of at least $1 billion, and beat the
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index over the ten-year period. Thirty-one mu-
tual funds made the cut.
     Then he looked at the process each manager used to beat the mar-
ket, and isolated four attributes that set this group apart from the ma-
jority of fund managers.

      1. Portfolio turnover. As a whole, the market-beating mutual funds
         had an average turnover ratio of about 30 percent. This stands in
         stark contrast to the turnover for all equity funds—110 percent.
      2. Portfolio concentration. The long-term outperformers tend to
         have higher portfolio concentration than the index or other gen-
         eral equity funds. On average, the outperforming mutual funds
         placed 37 percent of their assets in their top ten names.
      3. Investment style. The vast majority of the above-market per-
         formers espoused an intrinsic-value approach to selecting stocks.
      4. Geographic location. Only a small fraction of the outperformers
         hail from the East Coast financial centers, New York or
         Boston. Most of the high-alpha generators set up shop in cities
         like Chicago, Salt Lake City, Memphis, Omaha, and Baltimore.
         Michael suggests that perhaps being away from the frenetic pace
         of New York and Boston lessens the hyperactivity that perme-
         ates so many mutual fund portfolios.
                                                      Afterword       209

     A common thread for outperformance, whether it be for the Super-
investors of Graham-and-Doddsville, the Superinvestors of Buffettville,
or those who lead the funds that Michael’s research identified, is a port-
folio strategy that emphasizes concentrated bets and low turnover and a
stock-selection process that emphasizes the discovery of a stock’s intrin-
sic value.
     Still, with all the evidence on how to generate above-average long
results, a vast majority of money managers continue to underperform
the stock market. Some believe this is evidence of market efficiency.
Perhaps with the intense competition among money managers, stocks
are more accurately priced. This may be partly true. We believe the
market has become more efficient, and there are fewer opportunities to
extract profits from the stock market using simple-minded techniques
to determine value. Surely no one still believes the market is going to
allow you to pick its pocket simply by calculating a P/E ratio.
     Analysts who understand the deep-rooted changes unfolding in a
business model will likely discover valuation anomalies that appear in the
market. Those analysts will have a different view of the duration and
magnitude of the company’s cash-generating ability compared with the
market’s view. “That the S&P 500 has also beaten other active money
managers is not an argument against active money management,” said
Bill Miller; “it is an argument against the methods employed by most
active money managers.”2

                                   
It has been twenty years since I read my first Berkshire Hathaway an-
nual report. Even now, when I think about Warren Buffett and his phi-
losophy, it fills me with excitement and passion for the world of
investing. There is no doubt in my mind that the process is sound and,
if consistently applied, will generate above-average long-term results.
We have only to observe today’s best-in-class money managers to see
that they are all using varied forms of Buffett’s investment approach.
    Although companies, industries, markets, and economies will al-
ways evolve over time, the value of Buffett’s investment philosophy lies
in its timelessness. No matter what the condition, investors can apply
Buffett’s approach to selecting stocks and managing portfolios.
    When Buffett first started managing money in the 1950s and
1960s, he was thinking about stocks as businesses and managing focused
210     AFTERWORD

portfolios. When he added the new economic franchises to Berkshire’s
portfolio in the 1970s and 1980s, he was still thinking about stocks as
businesses and managing a focused portfolio. When Bill Miller bought
technology and Internet companies for his value fund in the 1990s and
into the first half of this decade, he was thinking about stocks as busi-
nesses and managing a focused portfolio.
     Were the companies purchased in the 1950s different from the com-
panies in the 1980s? Yes. Were the companies purchased in the 1960s dif-
ferent from those purchased in 1990s? Of course they were. Businesses
change, industries unfold, and the competitiveness of markets allows new
economic franchises to be born while others slowly wither. Throughout
the constant evolution of markets and companies, it should be comforting
for investors to realize there is an investment process that remains robust
even against the inevitable forces of change.
     At Berskhire’s 2004 annual meeting, a shareholder asked Warren
whether, looking back, he would change anything about his approach.
“If we were to do it over again, we’d do it pretty much the same way,”
he answered. “We’d read everything in sight about businesses and indus-
tries. Working with far less capital, our investment universe would be far
broader than it is currently. I would continually learn the basic principles
of sound investing which are Ben Graham’s, affected in a significant way
by Charlie and Phil Fisher in terms of looking at better businesses.” He
paused for a moment, then added, “There’s nothing different, in my
view, about analyzing securities today versus fifty years ago.”
     Nor will there be anything different five, ten, or twenty years from
now. Markets change, prices change, economic environments change,
industries come and go. And smart investors change their day-to-day
behavior to adapt to the changing context. What does not change, how-
ever, are the fundamentals.
     Those who follow Buffett’s way will still analyze stocks (and com-
panies) according to the same tenets; will maintain a focus portfolio;
and will ignore bumps, dips, and bruises. They believe, as I do, that the
principles that have guided Warren Buffett’s investment decisions for
some sixty years are indeed timeless, and provide a foundation of solid
investment wisdom on which all of us may build.
                               Appendix

Table A.1 Berkshire Hathaway 1977 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                              Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost     Value
  934,300         The Washington Post Company           $ 10,628   $ 33,401
1,969,953         GEICO Convertible Preferred             19,417     33,033
  592,650         Interpublic Group of Companies           4,531     17,187
  220,000         Capital Cities Communications, Inc.     10,909     13,228
1,294,308         GEICO Common Stock                       4,116     10,516
  324,580         Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corp.      11,218      9,981
  226,900         Knight-Ridder Newspapers                 7,534      8,736
  170,800         Ogilvy & Mather International            2,762      6,960
1,305,800         Kaiser Industries, Inc.                    778      6,039
                  Total                                 $ 71,893   $139,081
                  All other common stocks                 34,996     41,992
                  Total common stocks                   $106,889   $181,073

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1977 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




                                                                      211
Table A.2 Berkshire Hathaway 1978 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
  934,000         The Washington Post Company          $ 10,628   $ 43,445
1,986,953         GEICO Convertible Preferred            19,417     28,314
  953,750         SAFECO Corporation                     23,867     26,467
  592,650         Interpublic Group of Companies          4,531     19,039
1,066,934         Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corp.     18,085     18,671
  453,800         Knight-Ridder Newspapers                7,534     10,267
1,294,308         GEICO Common Stock                      4,116      9,060
  246,450         American Broadcasting Companies         6,082      8,626
                  Total                                $ 94,260   $163,889
                  All other common stocks                39,506     57,040
                  Total common stocks                  $133,766   $220,929

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1978 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




Table A.3 Berkshire Hathaway 1979 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
5,730,114         GEICO Corp. (common stock)           $ 28,288   $ 68,045
1,868,000         The Washington Post Company            10,628     39,241
1,007,500         Handy & Harman                         21,825     38,537
  953,750         SAFECO Corporation                     23,867     35,527
  711,180         Interpublic Group of Companies          4,531     23,736
1,211,834         Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corp.     20,629     23,328
  771,900         F.W. Woolworth Company                 15,515     19,394
  328,700         General Foods, Inc.                    11,437     11,053
246,450           American Broadcasting Companies         6,082      9,673
  289,700         Affiliated Publications                 2,821      8,800
  391,400         Ogilvy & Mather International           3,709      7,828
  282,500         Media General,Inc.                      4,545      7,345
  112,545         Amerada Hess                            2,861      5,487
                  Total                                $156,738   $297,994
                  All other common stocks                28,675     36,686
                  Total common stocks                  $185,413   $334,680

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1979 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.

212
Table A.4 Berkshire Hathaway 1980 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
7,200,000         GEICO Corporation                    $ 47,138   $105,300
 1983,812         General Foods                          62,507     59,889
2,015,000         Handy & Harman                         21,825     58,435
1,250,525         SAFECO Corporation                     32,063     45,177
1,868,600         The Washington Post Company            10,628     42,277
  464,317         Aluminum Company of America            25,577     27,685
1,211,834         Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corp.     20,629     27,569
  711,180         Interpublic Group of Companies          4,531     22,135
  667,124         F.W. Woolworth Company                 13,583     16,511
  370,088         Pinkerton’s, Inc.                      12,144     16,489
  475,217         Cleveland-Cliffs Iron Company          12,942     15,894
  434,550         Affiliated Publications, Inc.           2,821     12,222
  245,700         R.J. Reynolds Industries                8,702     11,228
  391,400         Ogilvy & Mather International           3,709      9,981
  282,500         Media General                           4,545      8,334
  247,039         National Detroit Corporation            5,930      6,299
  151,104         The Times mirror Company                4,447      6,271
  881,500         National Student Marketing              5,128      5,895
                  Total                                $298,848   $497,591
                  All other common stocks                26,313     32,096
                  Total common stocks                  $325,161   $529,687

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1980 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




                                                                     213
Table A.5 Berkshire Hathaway 1981 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
7,200,000         GEICO Corporation                   $ 47,138    $199,800
1,764,824         R.J. Reynolds Industries              76,668      83,127
2,101,244         General Foods                         66,277      66,714
1,868,600         The Washington Post Company           10,628      58,160
2,015,000         Handy & Harman                        21,825      36,270
  785,225         SAFECO Corporation                    21,329      31,016
  711,180         Interpublic Group of Companies         4,531      23,202
  370,088         Pinkerton’s, Inc.                     12,144      19,675
  703,634         Aluminum Company of America           19,359      18,031
  420,441         Arcata Corporation                    14,076      15,136
  475,217         Cleveland-Cliffs Iron Company         12,942      14,362
  451,650         Affiliated Publications, Inc.          3,297      14,362
  441,522         GATX Corporation                      17,147      13,466
  391,400         Ogilvy & Mather International          3,709      12,329
  282,500         Media General                          4,545      11,088
                  Total                               $335,615    $616,490
                  All other common stocks               16,131      22,739
                  Total common stocks                 $351,746    $639,229

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1981 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




214
Table A.6 Berkshire Hathaway 1982 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                              Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost     Value
7,200,000         GEICO Corporation                   $ 47,138     $309,600
3,107,675         R.J. Reynolds Industries             142,343      158,715
1,868,600         The Washington Post Company           10,628      103,240
2,101,244         General Foods                         66,277       83,680
1,531,391         Time, Inc.                            45,273       79,824
  908,800         Crum & Forster                        47,144       48,962
2,379,200         Handy & Harman                        27,318       46,692
  711,180         Interpublic Group of Companies         4,531       34,314
  460,650         Affiliated Publications, Inc.          3,516       16,929
  391,400         Ogilvy & Mather International          3,709       17,319
  282,500         Media General                          4,545       12,289
                  Total                               $402,422     $911,564
                  All other common stocks               21,611       34,058
                  Total common stocks                 $424,033     $945,622

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1982 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




Table A.7 Berkshire Hathaway 1983 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
6,850,000         GEICO Corporation                   $ 47,138    $ 398,156
5,618,661         R.J. Reynolds Industries             268,918      314,334
4,451,544         General Foods                        163,786      228,698
1,868,600         The Washington Post Company           10,628      136,875
  901,788         Time, Inc.                            27,732       56,860
2,379,200         Handy & Harman                        27,318       42,231
  636,310         Interpublic Group of Companies         4,056       33,088
  690,975         Affiliated Publications, Inc.          3,516       26,603
  250,400         Ogilvy & Mather International          2,580       12,833
  197,200         Media General                          3,191       11,191
                  Total                               $558,863    $1,260,869
                  All other common stocks                7,485        18,044
                  Total common stocks                 $566,348    $1,278,913

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1983 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.

                                                                       215
Table A.8 Berkshire Hathaway 1984 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
6,850,000         GEICO Corporation                   $ 47,138    $ 397,300
4,047,191         General Foods                        149,870      226,137
3,895,710         Exxon Corporation                    173,401      175,307
1,868,600         The Washington Post Company           10,628      149,955
2,553,488         Time, Inc.                            89,237      109,162
  740,400         American Broadcasting Companies       44,416       46,738
2,379,200         Handy & Harman                        27,318       38,662
  690,975         Affiliated Publications, Inc.          3,516       32,908
  818,872         Interpublic Group of Companies         2,570       28,149
  555,949         Northwest Industries                  26,581       27,242
                  Total                               $573,340    $1,231,560
                  All other common stocks               11,634        37,326
                  Total common stocks                 $584,974    $1,268,886

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1984 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




Table A.9 Berkshire Hathaway 1985 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                   Cost    Value
6,850,000         GEICO Corporation                   $ 45,713    $ 595,950
1,727,765         The Washington Post Company            9,731      205,172
  900,800         American Broadcasting Companies       54,435      108,997
2,350,922         Beatrice Companies, Inc.             106,811      108,142
1,036,461         Affiliated Publications, Inc.          3,516       55,710
2,553,488         Time, Inc.                            20,385       52,669
2,379,200         Handy & Harman                        27,318       43,718
                  Total                               $267,909    $1,170,358
                  All other common stocks                7,201        27,963
                  Total common stocks                 $275,110    $1,198,321

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1985 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.

216
Table A.10 Berkshire Hathaway 1986 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                              Market
of Shares                        Company                Cost        Value
2,990,000         Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.            $515,775    $ 801,694
6,850,000         GEICO Corporation                     45,713      674,725
1,727,765         The Washington Post Company            9,731      269,531
2,379,200         Handy & Harman                        27,318       46,989
  489,300         Lear Siegler, Inc.                    44,064       44,587
                  Total                               $642,601    $1,837,526
                  All other common stocks               12,763        36,507
                  Total common stocks                 $655,364    $1,874,033

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1986 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.


Table A.11 Berkshire Hathaway 1987 Common Stock Portfolio
Number                                                             Market
of Shares                        Company                Cost       Value
3,000,000         Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.            $517,500    $1,035,000
6,850,000         GEICO Corporation                     45,713       756,925
1,727,765         The Washington Post Company            9,731       323,092
                  Total common stocks                 $572,944    $2,115,017

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1987 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.



Table A.12 Berkshire Hathaway 1988 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                            Market
 of Shares                       Company                Cost       Value
 3,000,000        Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.           $ 517,500    $1,086,750
 6,850,000        GEICO Corporation                     45,713       849,400
14,172,500        The Coca-Cola Company                592,540       632,448
 1,727,765        The Washington Post Company            9,731       364,126
 2,400,000        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.      71,729       121,200
                  Total common stocks                $1,237,213   $3,053,924

Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1988 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.

                                                                       217
Table A.16 Berkshire Hathaway 1992 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                             Market
 of Shares                       Company                Cost        Value
93,400,000        The Coca-Cola Company              $1,023,920   $ 3,911,125
34,250,000        GEICO Corporation                      45,713     2,226,250
 3,000,000        Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.              517,500     1,523,500
24,000,000        The Gillette Company                  600,000     1,365,000
16,196,700        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.      414,527       783,515
 6,358,418        Wells Fargo & Company                 380,983       485,624
 4,350,000        General Dynamics                      312,438       450,769
 1,727,765        The Washington Post Company             9,731       396,954
38,335,000        Guinness plc                          333,019       299,581
                  Total common stocks                $3,637,831   $11,442,318
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1992 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




Table A.17 Berkshire Hathaway 1993 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                             Market
 of Shares                       Company                Cost        Value
93,400,000        The Coca-Cola Company              $1,023,920   $ 4,167,975
34,250,000        GEICO Corporation                      45,713     1,759,594
24,000,000        The Gillette Company                  600,000     1,431,000
 2,000,000        Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.              345,000     1,239,000
 6,791,218        Wells Fargo & Company                 423,680       878,614
13,654,600        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.      307,505       681,023
 1,727,765        The Washington Post Company             9,731       440,148
 4,350,000        General Dynamics                       94,938       401,287
38,335,000        Guinness plc                          333,019       270,822
                  Total common stocks                $3,183,506   $11,269,463
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1993 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




                                                                        219
Table A.18 Berkshire Hathaway 1994 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                             Market
 of Shares                       Company                Cost        Value
93,400,000        The Coca-Cola Company              $1,023,920   $ 5,150,000
24,000,000        The Gillette Company                  600,000     1,797,000
20,000,000        Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.              345,000     1,705,000
34,250,000        GEICO Corporation                      45,713     1,678,250
 6,791,218        Wells Fargo & Company                 423,680       984,272
27,759,941        American Express Company              723,919       818,918
13,654,600        Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.      270,468       644,441
 1,727,765        The Washington Post Company             9,731       418,983
19,453,300        PNC Bank Corporation                  503,046       410,951
 6,854,500        Gannett Co., Inc.                     335,216       365,002
                  Total common stocks                $4,280,693   $13,972,817
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1994 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in thousands.




Table A.19 Berkshire Hathaway 1995 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                             Market
 of Shares                       Company                Cost        Value
 49,456,900       American Express Company            $1,392.70    $ 2,046.30
 20,000,000       Capital Cities/ABC, Inc.               345.00      2,467.50
100,000,000       The Coca-Cola Company                1,298.90      7,425.00
 12,502,500       Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.       260.10      1,044.00
 34,250,000       GEICO Corporation                       45.70      2,393.20
 48,000,000       The Gillette Company                   600.00      2,502.00
  6,791,218       Wells Fargo & Company                  423.70      1,466.90
                  Total common stocks                 $4,366.10    $19,344.90
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1995 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




220
Table A.20 Berkshire Hathaway 1996 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                           Market
 of Shares                       Company               Cost       Value
 49,456,900       American Express Company           $1,392.70   $ 2,794.30
200,000,000       The Coca-Cola Company               1,298.90    10,525.00
 24,614,214       The Walt Disney Company               577.00     1,716.80
 64,246,000       Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.      333.40     1,772.80
 48,000,000       The Gillette Company                  600.00     3,732.00
 30,156,600       McDonald’s Corporation              1,265.30     1,368.40
  1,727,765       The Washington Post Company            10.60       579.00
  7,291,418       Wells Fargo & Company                 497.80     1,966.90
                  Total common stocks                $5,975.70   $24,455.20
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1996 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




Table A.21 Berkshire Hathaway 1997 Common Stock Portfolio
 Number                                                           Market
 of Shares                       Company               Cost       Value
 49,456,900       American Express Company           $1,392.70   $ 4,414.00
200,000,000       The Coca-Cola Company               1,298.90    13,337.50
 21,563,414       The Walt Disney Company               381.20     2,134.80
 63,977,600       Freddie Mac                           329.40     2,683.10
 48,000,000       The Gillette Company                  600.00     4,821.00
 23,733,198       Travelers Group Inc.                  604.40     1,278.60
  1,727,765       The Washington Post Company            10.60       840.60
  6,690,218       Wells Fargo & Company                 412.60     2,270.90
                  Total common stocks                $5,029.80   $31,780.50
Source: Berkshire Hathaway 1997 Annual Report.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




                                                                      221
Table A.22 Berkshire Hathaway 1998 Common Stock Portfolio
   Shares                                Company                                Cost*   Market
 50,536,900                American Express Company                            $1,470   $ 5,180
200,000,000                The Coca-Cola Company                                1,299    13,400
 51,202,242                The Walt Disney Company                                281     1,536
 60,298,000                Freddie Mac                                            308     3,885
 96,000,000                The Gillette Company                                   600     4,590
  1,727,765                The Washington Post Company                             11       999
 63,595,180                Wells Fargo & Company                                  392     2,540
                           Others                                               2,683     5,135
                           Total Common Stocks                                 $7,044   $37,265

*Represents tax-basis cost which, in aggregate, is $1.5 billion less than GAAP cost.
Source: Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1998.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




Table A.23 Berkshire Hathaway 1999 Common Stock Portfolio
   Shares                                Company                                Cost*   Market
 50,536,900                American Express Company                            $1,470   $ 8,402
200,000,000                The Coca-Cola Company                                1,299    11,650
 59,559,300                The Walt Disney Company                                281     1,536
 60,298,000                Freddie Mac                                            294     2,803
 96,000,000                The Gillette Company                                   600     3,954
  1,727,765                The Washington Post Company                             11       960
 59,136,680                Wells Fargo & Company                                  349     2,391
                           Others                                               4,180     6,848
                           Total Common Stocks                                 $8,203   $37,008

*Represents tax-basis cost which, in aggregate, is $691 million less than GAAP cost.
Source: Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1999.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




222
Table A.26 Berkshire Hathaway 2002 Common Stock Portfolio
   Shares                             Company               Cost   Market
151,610,700              American Express Company       $1,470      $5,359
200,000,000              The Coca-Cola Company           1,299       8,768
 15,999,200              H&R Block, Inc.                   255         643
 24,000,000              Moody’s Corporation               499         991
  1,727,765              The Washington Post Company        11       1,275
 53,265,080              Wells Fargo & Company             306       2,497
                         Others                          4,621       5,383
                         Total Common Stocks            $9,146     $28,363

Source: Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




Table A.27 Berkshire Hathaway 2003 Common Stock Portfolio
   Shares                             Company               Cost   Market
151,610,700              American Express Company       $1,470      $7,312
200,000,000              The Coca-Cola Company           1,299      10,150
 96,000,000              The Gillette Company              600       3,526
 14,610,900              H&R Block, Inc.                   227         809
 15,476,500              HCA Inc.                          492         665
   6,708,760             M&T Bank Corporation              103         659
 24,000,000              Moody’s Corporation               499       1,453
2,338,961,000            PetroChina Company Limited        488       1,340
   1,727,765             The Washington Post Company        11       1,367
 56,448,380              Wells Fargo & Company             463       3,324
                         Others                          2,863       4,682
                         Total Common Stocks            $8,515     $35,287

Source: Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003.
Note: Dollar amounts are in millions.




224
                                 Notes

Chapter 1 The World’s Greatest Investor

 1. Carol J. Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune (April 11,
    1988), 30.
 2. Warren Buffett, “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” Hermes
    ( Fall 1984).
 3. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1999, 3.


Chapter 2 The Education of Warren Buffett

 1. Adam Smith, Supermoney (New York: Random House, 1972), 178.
 2. Benjamin Graham and David Dodd, Security Analysis, 3rd ed. (New York:
    McGraw-Hill, 1951), 38.
 3. Ibid., 13.
 4. Address by Warren Buffett to New York Society of Security Analysts, De-
    cember 6, 1994, quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value: The
    Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004), 1341.
 5. John Train, The Money Masters (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), 60.
 6. Philip Fisher, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits (New York: Harper
    & Brothers, 1958), 11.
 7. Ibid., 33.
 8. Philip Fisher, Developing an Investment Philosophy, The Financial Analysts
    Research Foundation, monograph number 10, 1.
 9. I am grateful to Peter Bernstein and his excellent book, Capital Ideas: The
    Improbable Origins of Modern Wall Street (New York: The Free Press,
    1992), for this background information on Williams.

                                                                          225
226      NOTES

10.   Ibid., 151.
11.   Ibid., 153.
12.   Quoted on www.moneychimp.com.
13.   Bernstein, Capital Ideas, 162.
14.   Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett
      ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2000), 89.
15.   Munger’s sweeping concept of the “latticework of mental models” is the
      subject of Robert Hagstrom’s book Investing: The Last Liberal Art (New
      York: Texere, 2000).
16.   A frequent comment, widely quoted.
17.   Robert Lenzner, “Warren Buffett’s Idea of Heaven: ‘I Don’t Have to Work
      with People I Don’t Like,’ ” Forbes (October 18, 1993), 43.
18.   L. J. Davis, “Buffett Takes Stock,” New York Times magazine (April 1,
      1990), 61.
19.   Ibid.
20.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1987, 15.
21.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, 17.
22.   Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor, 4th ed. (New York: Harper &
      Row, 1973), 287.
23.   Adam Smith’s Money World, PBS, October 21, 1993, quoted in Kilpatrick,
      Of Permanent Value (2004), 1337.
24.   Warren Buffett, “What We Can Learn from Philip Fisher,” Forbes (Octo-
      ber 19, 1987), 40.
25.   “The Money Men—How Omaha Beats Wall Street,” Forbes (November 1,
      1969), 82.


Chapter 3 “Our Main Business Is Insurance”: The Early Days of
Berkshire Hathaway
 1. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1985, 8.
 2. Warren Buffett, “The Security I Like Best,” The Commercial and Financial
    Chronicle ( December 6, 1951); reprinted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Perma-
    nent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett, rev. ed. ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE,
    2000), 302.
 3. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1999, 9.
 4. The purchase price is often quoted as $22 billion, and in a sense that is true.
    The two companies announced in June 1998 that Berkshire would acquire
    all General Re shares at a 29 percent premium over the closing share price,
    by trading an equivalent value in Berkshire stock. But six months passed be-
    fore the deal f inally closed, and by that time both share prices had declined.
    General Re shareholders received $204.40 for each share they owned, rather
    than the $276.50 value the shares had back in June. The actual purchase
                                                                 Notes      227

      price was thus approximately $16 billion in Berkshire stock, instead of $22
      billion. Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2000), 18.
 5.   Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett
      ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004), 354.
 6.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2000.
 7.   Special letter to shareholders, Berkshire Hathaway Quarterly Report, 2001.
 8.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003.
 9.   Robert Miles, The Warren Buf fett CEO (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2003), 70,
      quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2004).
10.   Quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2004), 375.
11.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001.
12.   Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting 2001, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Perma-
      nent Value (2004), 1358.
13.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1999, 6.



Chapter 4 Buying a Business

 1. Fortune, October 31, 1994, quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent
    Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004),
    1340.
 2. Quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren
    Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2000), 14.
 3. Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2004), 498.
 4. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003, 19.
 5. Monte Burke, “Trailer King,” Forbes (September 30, 2002), 72.
 6. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003, 5.
 7. Ibid.
 8. Daily Nebraskan (April 10, 2003), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value
    (2004), 728.
 9. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003, 6.
10. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002, 5.
11. From a talk given at the University of Florida, quoted in the Miami Herald
    ( December 27, 1998), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2004),
    1350.
12. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1989, 17.
13. Robert Lenzner, “Warren Buffett’s Idea of Heaven: ‘I Don’t Have to Work
    with People I Don’t Like,’ ” Forbes (October 18, 1993), 43.
14. Mary Rowland, “Mastermind of a Media Empire,” Working Woman (No-
    vember 11, 1989), 115.
15. Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value (2004), 398.
16. Ibid.
228     NOTES

17. Ibid., 393.
18. Lenzner, “Warren Buffett’s Idea of Heaven,” 43.


Chapter 5 Investing Guidelines: Business Tenets

 1. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1987, 14.
 2. Fortune, April 11, 1988, quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value:
    The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004), 1329.
 3. Carol J. Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune (April 11,
    1988), 30.
 4. Fortune (November 11, 1993), 11.
 5. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1991, 15.
 6. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1987, 7.
 7. BusinessWeek, July 5, 1999, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value
    (2004), 1353.
 8. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1989, 22.
 9. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1996, 15.
10. Quoted in Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1993, 14.
11. Monte Burke, “Trailer King,” Forbes (September 30, 2002), 72.
12. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 1995, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1342.
13. St. Petersburg Times ( December 15, 1999), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1356.
14. Fortune (November 22, 1999), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value
    (2004), 1356.
15. U.S. News & World Report ( June 20, 1994), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1340.
16. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 1996, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1344.
17. John Train, The Money Masters (New York: Penguin Books, 1981), 60.
18. Maria Halkias, “Berkshire Hathaway to Buy Maker of Tony Lama Boots,”
    Dallas Morning News ( June 20, 2000), 1D.
19. Maria Haklias, “CEO of Justin Industries to Retire,” Dallas Morning News
    (March 17, 1999).
20. Halkias, “Berkshire Hathaway to Buy Tony Lama Boots.”
21. “Berkshire Hathaway to Purchase Texas-Based Manufacturer,” Fort Worth-
    Star Telegram ( June 21, 2000).
22. Andrew Kilpatrick, Warren Buf fett: The Good Guy of Wall Street (New
    York: Donald Fine, 1992), 123.
23. Art Harris, “The Man Who Changed the Real Thing,” Washington Post
    ( July 22, 1985), B1.
24. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1984, 8.
                                                              Notes     229

Chapter 6 Investing Guidelines: Management Tenets

 1. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1989.
 2. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1986.
 3. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2000, 6.
 4. SellingPower.com, October 2001, quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Perma-
    nent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birminghan, AL: AKPE, 2004),
    659.
 5. Ibid., 661.
 6. Carol J. Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune (April 11,
    1988), 32.
 7. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001, 5.
 8. “Puns Fly as Buffett Buys Fruit of the Loom,” Toronto Star (May 7, 2002).
 9. The Washington Post Company Annual Report, 1992, 5.
10. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1991, 8.
11. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1988, 5.
12. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002.
13. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003.
14. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1986, 5.
15. “Strategy for the 1980s,” The Coca-Cola Company.
161.Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1989, 22.
17. Ibid.
18. Linda Grant, “The $4 Billion Regular Guy,” Los Angeles Times Magazine
    (April 7, 1991), 36.
19. Monte Burke, “Trailer King,” Forbes (September 30, 2002), 72.
20. William Stern, “The Singing Mobile Home Salesman,” Forbes (October
    26, 1992), 240.
21. Burke, “Trailer King,” 72.
22. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1985, 19.
23. Jim Rasmussen, “Buffett Talks Strategy with Students,” Omaha World-
    Herald ( January 2, 1993), 26.
24. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001, 3.
25. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003.
26. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003, p7–8.
27. Reported by Greg Miles, Bloomberg News (April 2003).
28. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1991, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1333.
29. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002, 3.
30. Ibid., 16.
31. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003, 9.
32. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 1993, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1335.
33. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002, 21.
230      NOTES

Chapter 7 Investing Guidelines: Financial Tenets

 1.   Berkshire Letters to Shareholders, 1977–1983, 43.
 2.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1987.
 3.   “Strategy for the 1980s,” The Coca-Cola Company.
 4.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1984, 15.
 5.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1986, 25.
 6.   Carol J. Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune (April 11,
      1988), 34.
 7.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, 16.
 8.   Chalmers M. Roberts, The Washington Post: The First 100 Years ( Boston:
      Houghton Miff lin, 1977), 449.
 9.   Ibid., 426.
10.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002, quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick,
      Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL:
      AKPE, 2004), 1361.



Chapter 8 Investing Guidelines: Value Tenets

 1. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 2003, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1362.
 2. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1989, 5.
 3. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 1988, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1330.
 4. Jim Rasmussen, “Buffett Talks Strategy with Students,” Omaha World-
    Herald ( January 2, 1994), 26.
 5. The f irst stage applies 15 percent annual growth for ten years, starting in
    1988. In year one, 1988, owner earnings were $828 million; by year ten,
    they will be $4.349 billion. Starting with year eleven, growth will slow to 5
    percent per year, the second stage. In year eleven, owner earnings will equal
    $3.516 billion ($3.349 billion × 5 percent + $3.349 billion). Now, we can
    subtract this 5 percent growth rate from the risk-free rate of return (9 per-
    cent) and reach a capitalization rate of 4 percent. The discounted value of a
    company with $3.516 billion in owner earnings capitalized at 4 percent is
    $87.9 billion. Since this value, $87.9 billion, is the discounted value of Coca-
    Cola’s owner earnings in year eleven, we next have to discount this future
    value by the discount factor at the end of year ten [1/(1+.09)10] = .4224. The
    present value of the residual value of Coca-Cola in year ten is $37.129 bil-
    lion. The value of Coca-Cola then equals its residual value ($37.129 billion)
    plus the sum of the present value of cash f lows during this period ($11.248
    billion), for a total of $48.377 billion.
                                                                Notes     231

 6.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1991, 5.
 7.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1985, 19.
 8.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, 16.
 9.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1993, 16.
10.   Fortune ( December 19, 1988), quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value
      (2004), 1331.
11.   Berkshire Letters to Shareholders, 1977–1983, 53.
12.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001, 5.
13.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001, 15.
14.   Grace Shim, “Berkshire Hathaway to Buy Fruit of the Loom,” Omaha
      World-Herald (November 4, 2001).
15.   Dean Foust, “This Trailer Deal Could Get Trashed,” BusinessWeek (Sep-
      tember 8, 2003), 44.
16.   David Wells, “Buffett Says He Will Not Increase Bid for Clayton,” The Fi-
      nancial Times, USA ed. ( July 10, 2003), 19.


Chapter 9 Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

 1. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2003.
 2. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1988, 14.
 3. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, quoted in Lawrence A.
    Cunningham, The Essays of Warren Buf fett: Lessons for Corporate Amer-
    ica, rev. ed. (privately printed ), 105.
 4. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, 18.
 5. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2002.
 6. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2000.
 7. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1988, 15.


Chapter 10 Managing Your Portfolio

 1. Personal communication to author, August 1994.
 2. Andrew Barry, “With Little Cheery News in Sight, Stocks Take a Break,”
    Barron’s (November 16, 1998), MW1.
 3. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1993, 15.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Ronald Surz, “R-Squareds and Alphas Are Far from different Alpha-Bets,”
    The Journal of Investing (Summer 1998).
 6. Interview with Warren Buffett, August 1994.
 7. Wall Street Journal (September 30, 1987), quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of
    Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE,
    2004), 1328.
232      NOTES

 8.   Outstanding Investor Digest (August 10, 1995), 63.
 9.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1993, 18.
10.   Ibid., 13.
11.   Outstanding Investor Digest (August 8, 1996), 29.
12.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1988, 18.
13.   Outstanding Investor Digest (August 8, 1996), 29.
14.   The speech was adapted as an article in the Columbia Business School’s
      publication Hermes ( Fall 1984), with the same title. The remarks directly
      quoted here are from that article.
15.   Warren Buffett, “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” Hermes
      ( Fall 1984). The superinvestors Buffett presented in the article include
      Walter Schloss, who worked at Graham-Newman Corporation in the mid-
      1950s, along with Buffett; Tom Knapp, another Graham-Newman alum-
      nus, who later formed Tweedy-Browne Partners with Ed Anderson, also a
      Graham follower; Bill Ruane, a former Graham student who went on to es-
      tablish the Sequoia Fund; Buffett’s partner Charlie Munger; Rick Guerin
      of Pacif ic Partners; and Stan Perlmeter of Perlmeter Investments.
16.   Ibid.
17.   Ibid.
18.   Sequoia Fund Annual Report, 1996.
19.   Solveig Jansson, “GEICO Sticks to Its Last,” Institutional Investor ( July
      1986), 130.
20.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1986, 15.
21.   Outstanding Investor Digest (August 8, 1996), 10.
22.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1996.
23.   Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 2001, 4.


Chapter 11 The Psychology of Money

 1. BusinessWeek ( July 5, 1999), quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent
    Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004), 1353.
 2. Carol Loomis, ed., “Mr. Buffett on the Stock Market,” Fortune (November
    22, 1999).
 3. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 2002, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1360.
 4. Mark Hulbert, “Be a Tiger Not a Hen,” Forbes (May 25, 1992), 298.
 5. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1990, 17.
 6. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1992, 6.
 7. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1986, 16.
 8. Benjamin Graham, The Intelligent Investor: A Book of Practical Counsel
    (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), 107.
                                                              Notes      233

 9. Outstanding Investor Digest (May 5, 1995), 51.
10. Graham, The Intelligent Investor, 107.
11. Brian O’Reilly, “Why Can’t Johnny Invest?” Fortune (November 9, 1998),
    73.
12. Fuerbringer, “Why Both Bulls and Bears Can Act So Bird-Brained,” New
    York Times (March 30, 1997), section 3, 6.
13. Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett
    ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 1998), 683.


Chapter 12 The Unreasonable Man

 1. This quote was used to describe Warren Buffett in V. Eugene Shahan’s arti-
    cle, “Are Short-Term Performance and Value Investing Mutually Exclusive?”
    Hermes (Spring 1986).
 2. Carol J. Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune (April 11,
    1988), 30.
 3. Ibid., 34.
 4. Fortune ( January 4, 1988), quoted in Andrew Kilpatrick, Of Permanent
    Value: The Story of Warren Buf fett ( Birmingham, AL: AKPE, 2004),
    1329.
 5. Loomis, “Inside Story,” 28.
 6. Linda Grant, “The $4 Billion Regular Guy,” Los Angeles Times Maga-
    zine, 36.
 7. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1993, 15.
 8. Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting, 1993, quoted in Kilpatrick, Of Per-
    manent Value (2004), 1335.
 9. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1987, 15.
10. Robert Lenzner, “Warren Buffett’s Idea of Heaven: ‘I Don’t Have to Work
    with People I Don’t Like,’ ” Forbes (October 18, 1993), 40.
11. Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report, 1992, 6.


Afterword: Managing Money the Warren Buffett Way

 1. “Investing: Profession or Business? Thoughts on Beating the Market
    Index,” The Consilient Observer, vol. 2, no. 14 ( July 15, 2003).
 2. Legg Mason quarterly market commentary, January 25, 1999.
           Acknowledgments


T
      o begin, I want to express my deep gratitude to Warren Buffett for
      his teachings and for allowing me to use his copyrighted material.
      It is next to impossible to improve on what Warren has already
said. This book is the better for being able to use his own words instead
of subjecting you to a second-best paraphrase.
    Thanks also to Charlie Munger for his contributions to the study of
investing. His ideas on the “psychology of misjudgment” and the “lat-
ticework of mental models” are extremely important and should be ex-
amined by all. My appreciation to Charlie also includes thanks for his
thoughtful conversations and his earliest word of encouragement and
support.
    In the development of my investment skills, no one has been more
important in moving me from the theoretical to the practical than Bill
Miller. Bill has been my friend and intellectual coach for over twenty
years. His generosity is unmatched. As CEO of Legg Mason Capital
Management, Bill has taken me by the hand and showed me how to
apply Warren Buffett’s approach to all types of companies, including
those participating in the landscapes of the New Economy. What is par-
ticularly exciting for me is that Bill is not only a friend and teacher, but
also a colleague.
    I am also fortunate to work in an environment that supports and
promotes rational investing. And so I would like to thank all my col-
leagues at Legg Mason including Nancy Dennin, Mary Chris Gay, Ernie
Kiehne, Kyle Legg, Ira Malis, Michael Mauboussin, Jennifer Murphy,

                                                                       235
236    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

David Nelson, Randy Befumo, Scot Labin, Jay Leopold, Samantha
McLemore, Mitchell Penn, Dale Wettf laufer, and Jean Yu.
     Over the years, I have benefited greatly from sharing numerous
conversations about Warren Buffett with many thoughtful people. The
list includes Bob Coleman, Tom Russo, Chris Davis, David Winters,
Jamie Clark, Bill Ruane, Bob Goldfarb, Lou Simpson, Ajit Jain, Lisa
Rapuano, Alice Schroeder, Chuck Akre, Al Barr, David Braverman,
Wally Weitz, Mason Hawkins, Larry Pidgeon, and Ed Thorp.
     Several people assisted me in the research for sections of the book.
Thank you, Justin Green, Joan Lamm-Tennant, Pat Shunk, Michael Lev-
itan, Stewart Davis, Mary Mclaugh, John Fitzgerald, and Linda Penfold.
     Several prominent investors supported the book in its earliest pe-
riod. My great thanks to Peter Lynch, John Rothchild, Jack Bogle, Phil
Fisher, Ken Fisher, and Ed Haldeman.
     Over the years, I have had the pleasure of interacting with several
writers who in their own way are also Buffett experts. A special
thanks to Andy Kilpatrick, who in my judgment is the official histo-
rian of Berkshire Hathaway. Thanks also to Roger Lowenstein, Henry
Emerson, Janet Lowe, Carol Loomis, and Larry Cunningham.
     Three talented and supersmart young women have been extraordi-
narily helpful in the creation in the book, each doing a specialized piece
of research and manuscript development. Warm thanks to Ericka Peter-
son, Cathy Coladonato, and Victoria Larson.
     With all the appreciation I have previously given, none could match
the gratitude I owe my writing partner, Maggie Stuckey. Although we
work at opposite ends of the continent, Maggie has an uncanny knack
of getting inside my head and knowing exactly what I wish to commu-
nicate, often before I do. She is a dedicated professional who worked
tirelessly to improve this book; I am fortunate to have her on my side.
     My relationship with John Wiley & Sons has been always pleasur-
able. Myles Thompson, my friend and editor, championed The Warren
Buf fett Way when nobody had heard about it and not one copy had
been sold. Thanks, Myles. I also thank Joan O’Neil, Pamela van Giessen,
Mary Daniello, and the other publishing professionals at John Wiley for
their care and attention to my writings on Warren Buffett.
     I am greatly indebted to my agent, Laurie Harper at Sebastian Liter-
ary Agency. Laurie is, in a word, special. She does her job with honesty,
loyalty, integrity, intelligence, and warm humor. I could not be in better
                                              Acknowledgments         237

hands. A word of appreciation, too, to the late Michael Cohn for taking
a chance on a first-time writer ten years ago.
     Anyone who has sat down to write a book knows that means
countless hours spent alone that otherwise could be spent with family.
My wife Maggie is a constant source of love and support. On the first
day I told her I was going to write this book, she smiled and convinced
me that it could be done. Over the following months, she cared for our
family, giving me the luxury of time to write. Love without end to my
children, Kim, Robert, and John, and to my wife, who makes all things
possible for me. Even though they come last in this list, they are forever
first in my heart.
     For all that is good and right about this book, you may thank
the people I have mentioned. For any errors or omissions, I alone am
responsible.

                                                                R. G. H.
                                Index

Abegg, Gene, 67                        Ben Bridge Jeweler, 45
Accounting:                            Benjamin Moore, 45, 65– 66
  controls, 17                         Berkshire Hathaway, 2
  mental, 185–186                        annual reports/meetings, 4, 36, 81,
  scandals, 104 –105                           95
Acme Building Brands, 72, 74 –75         arbitrage success, 150 –151
Action bets, 134                         bonds, 143–146
Active portfolio management, 158–159     book value, 4 –7
Allocation of capital, 82–83, 98         Buffett’s involvement today, 9
Amazon.com, 104, 149                     and Coca-Cola, 7, 8, 51–52, 64 (see
American Express, 3, 91–92, 152, 162           also Coca-Cola)
American Tile Supply Company, 75         corporate net worth, 4
Anheuser-Busch, 99                       f ixed-income investments, 141–155
Annual reports, 4                        and GEICO Corporation, 31–33
Arbitrage, risk, 8, 150 –151             as holding company, 42–52
Arkata Corporation, 150                  insurance business, 29–39
Asymmetrical loss aversion, 185          owner’s point of view, 41–42
Auxier, Al, 46, 47                       reinsurance business, 36–37
Avarice and the institutional            textile company, 29–30
    imperative, 102–103                  and Washington Post Company, 64,
                                               67
Bank Holding Act, 67                     and Wells Fargo & Company, 67
Banking business, understanding the,   Bernstein, Peter, 21–22
    67                                 Bezos, Jeff, 104, 149
Bankrupt companies, buying, 89         Blumkin, Rose, 43–44
Barrett Resources, 154                 Bonds, 143–146
Behavioral f inance, 183–187             high-yield bond, 145

                                                                         239
240     INDEX

Bond yields, 124                          and Government Employees
Bradlee, Ben, 55                               Insurance Company (GEICO),
Brown-Forman, 99                               31–33, 149
Buffett, Warren Edward:                   and Graham, 25, 26, 27, 58 (see also
  and American Express, 91–92                  Graham, Benjamin)
  appearance, 4                           on human nature, 97
  on arbitrage, 151                       on institutional imperative, 96–102
  on avarice, 102–103                     and the insurance business, 29–39,
  background/education, 2, 11–27               95–96
  and banking, 67                         investment approach, 41, 49–50
  and Benjamin Moore, 65– 66              investment beginnings, 2, 25–26
  and Berkshire Hathaway, 4 –9 (see       and journalism, 64, 67
       also Berkshire Hathaway)           on long-term advantage, 70 –79
  and Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance      on malfeasance, 104 –105
       Group, 36–37                       on margin-of-safety principle, 131
  biographical details, 1–2, 64           on margin of safety, 25
  on business vs. investing, 61– 62       on mega-catastrophes, 35
  buying strategy, 130 –131               mistakes, learning from, 25
  on candor, 94 –96                       modern portfolio theory, 163–166
  certainties, buying on, 7               and Munger, 22–24, 28, 95 (see also
  choosing companies, ways of, 7–9,            Munger, Charles)
       61– 62                             National Fire & Marine Insurance
  circle of competence, 8, 19, 63              Company, 31
  and Clayton Homes, 70                   National Indemnity Company, 31,
  and Coca-Cola Company (see Coca-             36–37
       Cola Company)                      net worth, 1
  on consistency, 67–71                   owner’s point of view, 41–42
  contacts, developing, 26                and Pampered Chef, 49
  convertible preferred stocks, 151–155   partnership history, 2–4
  on corporate governance, 105–106        personal characteristics, 4, 7
  and diversif ication, 165–166           portfolio management, 157–175
  on dividends, 89                        on problem companies, 68
  education of, 11–28                     psychology of investing, 175,
  on eff icient market theory, 166             177–188, 189–198
  on ethics, 104 –106                     and risk, 165
  and Fisher, 26, 27, 28 (see also        salary, 103
       Fisher, Philip)                    stock options, 103–104
     on focus investing, 160 –163         and textile business, 29–30
     on franchises, 70 –71, 77            underwriting philosophy, 38–39
     on GAAP, 94 –95                      vehicles for managing investment, 31
     and General Re Corporation, 31,      and Washington Post Company,
          34 –36, 95–96                        64 – 65, 67 (see also Washington
     and Gillette, 52–54, 69–70                Post Company)
                                                               Index      241

  and Wells Fargo, 67                   owner earnings, 114
  white knight, 152                     prof it margins, 116, 124
  and Williams, 27, 28 (see also        return on equity, 111
        Williams, John Burr)            strategy for the 1980s, 111–112
Buffett Partnership (1950s, 1960s),     value of, 124 –127, 134 –135
      2–4, 29                          Columbia Business School, 2
Business(es)/company(ies):             Commodity business, 71, 77
  basic characteristics to look for,   Consistency, 67–70
        62–79                          Convertible preferred stocks,
  f inding outstanding, 61– 62             151–155
  management tenets, 59, 62            Cooper, Sheila O’Connell, 49
  research into, 63                    Corporate governance, 105–106
Business tenets, 59, 61–79             CORT Business Services, 45
Buying decision, 173                   Costs/expenses, 17
                                       Covariance, 164
Candor, 94 –96                         Cowles Media, 54
Capital asset pricing model, 164       Cuniff, Rick, 169
Capital Ideas ( Bernstein), 21–22
Cases in Point:                        Davidson, Lorimer, 32
  Benjamin Moore, 65– 66               Davis, Edwin, 22
  Fruit of the Loom, 86–89, 137–138    Dempster Mill Manufacturing, 25
  Justin Industries, 72–76             Depth of management, 18
  Larson-Juhl, 132–134                 Director negligence, 105–106
Cash f low, 113–114                    Discounted net cash-f low analysis,
Certainties, buying, 7                     20 –21
Chace, Ken, 29                         Diversif ication, 165–166
Champion International, 152            Dividends, 20 –21, 89–90
Chippewa, 73                             Washington Post Company, 92–93
Christopher, Doris, 48–49, 79, 94,     Dodd, David, 12, 166–167
    116                                Dorr, James J., 138
Circle of competence, 8, 19, 63,       Dynergy, 153
    123–124
Clayton, James, 45–46, 101             Economic goodwill, 71, 78
Clayton, Kevin, 46                     Education of Buffett, 11–28
Clayton Homes, 45–47, 70, 99–101       Eff icient market theory ( EMT), 164
  acquiring, 138                       Equity f inancing, 17–18
  compensation of salespeople, 101
Coca-Cola, 7, 8, 24, 51–52, 64,        Fama, Eugene, 20, 164
    68– 69, 77–78                      Farley, William, 86
  buyback, 90                          Fear and greed, effects of, 26
  dividends, 96                        Featherlite Building Products
  and institutional imperative, 99          Corporation, 75
  market value, 118                    Financial tenets, 59, 109–119
242     INDEX

Fisher, Philip, 11, 16–19, 26–27, 28,     common stocks, adapting, 14
      114                                 death of, 24
  bio data, 16                            def inition of investment, 13
  compared to Graham, 26                  and GEICO, 31–32
  focus investing, 161                    Intelligent Investor, The, 58
  and patience, 162–163                   margin of safety, 13, 25
  price changes, 163                      methodology, 25
Fixed-income securities, 141–155          and Mr. Market, 181–183
Focus investing, 158–175                  and psychology of investing, 58,
  challenge of, 174 –175                       178–179
  f inding companies, 160 –161            rules of investing, 14 –15
  high-probability events, 161–162        Security Analysis (Graham and
  psychology of, 187–188                       Dodd ), 12, 166
Focus Trust, 203                          on speculation, 13
Franchises, 70 –71, 77                    works of, 12
Fruit of the Loom, 44, 86–89,           Graham, Donald E., 57
      137–138                           Graham, Katherine, 55, 92, 102,
  bankruptcy, 137                           112–113, 116, 128
  history of, 86                        Graham, Philip, 55
                                        Graham-Newman Corporation, 2, 12
Garan, 44                               Green, Justin, 187
Gates, Bill, 1, 123                     Growth, buying, 85, 89
GEICO Corporation, 31–33                Growth Trust, 203–205
Generally Accepted Accounting
     Principles (GAAP), 94 –95          Hawkins, O. Mason, 148
General Reinsurance Corporation         Hazen, Paul, 115
     (General Re), 31, 34 –36, 95       High-yield bonds, 145–149
Gillette, King C., 51                   Hochschild-Kohn, 25
Gillette Company, 51–54, 69–70, 118     Holland, John B., 87–88
  convertible preferred stocks, 152     Human nature, Buffett on, 97
  value of, 127–128, 135–136
Globalization of business, 53–54        Illinois National Bank and Trust
Goizueta, Roberto, 77–78, 96, 99,              Company, 67
     111–112, 124 –125, 134 –135        Indexing, 3, 158–159
Golub, Harvey, 91–92                    Institutional imperative, 82, 96–102
Government Employees Insurance          Insurance, 29–39
     Company (GEICO), 31–33,               distinguishing features, 38–39
     171–172                            Intelligent Investor, The, 58
Graham, Benjamin, 12–16, 136            Internet lottery insurance, 37
  and Buffett, 2, 3, 11, 25, 166–167,   Investing guidelines:
       198                                 business tenets, 61–79
  Columbia class, 2, 12                    f inancial tenets, 109–119
                                                                Index       243

  management tenets, 81–108            Mental accounting, 185–186
  value tenets, 121–139                Meyer, Eugene, 55
                                       Microsoft, 123
Jain, Ajit, 37                         MidAmerican Energy Holdings
Justin, Enid, 72, 73                       Company, 152–154
Justin, H. J. ( Joe), 72               Miller, Bill, 204 –206, 210
Justin, John, Jr., 72, 73, 74, 75      Mindless imitation as a cause of failure,
Justin Industries, 44, 72–76               98–99
                                       Mistakes, value of, 95
Kern River Gas Transmission Project,   MiTek, 44 –45
    153                                Moat, def ining a, 70 –71
Keynes, John Maynard, 4                Mockler, Colman, 52, 127
Kiehne, Ernie, 204 –205                Modern f inance theory:
Kilpatrick, Andrew, 57                  Fama, Eugene, 20
Kirby Vacuum Cleaners, 44               Markowitz, Harry, 20
                                       Modern portfolio theory, 21–22,
Lama, Tony, 73                             163–166
Larson-Juhl, 45, 71, 132–134           Modigliani, Franco, 20
Larson Picture Frame, 132              Money, psychology of, 177–188
Learning from others, 11               Mr. Market, 181–183
Legg Mason, 147–148                    Munger, Charles, 2, 11, 22–24, 107,
Legg Mason Growth Trust, 203               188, 198
Level 3 Communications, 146–148         on Berkshire Hathaway, 22–23, 33,
Longleaf Partners, 147–148                    95
Loomis, Carol, 85                       vs. Buffet’s philosophy, 23 , 131
Loss aversion, 185                      on fair price for quality, 23, 131
                                        and Graham, 28, 167
Malfeasant accounting, 104 –105         and Mr. Market, 182–183
Management, quality of, 18              psychology of misjudgment, 28
Management, value of, 106–108           talents of, 167–168
Management tenets, 59, 81–108
Managing your portfolio, 157–175       National Fire & Marine Insurance
Margin of safety, 13, 25, 131              Company, 31
Market, stock:                         National Indemnity Company, 31, 97
 f luctuation, folly of, 25            Nebraska Furniture Mart, 43
Market potential, 17                   Negative cost of f loat, 35
Market value, 53, 70                   Newman, Jerome, 12
Markowitz, Harry, 20, 164              Nocona, 73
Mauboussin, Michael, 208–209           Notebaert, Dick, 149
McLane, Robert Drayton, 47
McLane, Robert Drayton, Jr., 47        Oakwood Homes, 46
McLane Company, 47–48, 79              One-dollar premise, 117–118
244     INDEX

Overconf idence, 183–184                Schneider, Gary, 74
Overreaction Bias, 184 –185             Schumpeter, Joseph, 20
Owner of the company, manager           Scott, Walter, Jr., 147–148, 153
   thinking like, 41–42                 Scott & Fetzer Company, 44
Owner earnings, 113–114                 Seagram Company, Ltd., 99
                                        Security Analysis (Graham and Dodd ),
Pampered Chef, 47–48, 79, 94, 116,           12, 166
     136                                See’s Candy Shops, 24, 43
Pascavis, Travis, 138                   Selling decision, 173–174
Pentagon Papers, 55                     Sequoia Fund, 2, 3, 169–171
Peter Kiewit Sons, 147                  Sharpe, Bill, 164
Ponzio, Craig, 132                      Shaw, Bob, 83
Portfolio management, 157–175           Shaw Industries, 45, 83–84
Price per share ( Washington Post       Shearson Lehman, 91
     Company), 56                       Simpson, Lou, 32, 167
Pricing f lexibility, 71                Sisco, Joseph, 52–53
Problems, companies with, 68            Smith, Adam, 26
Prof itability, 17                      Sokol, David, 154
Prof it margins, 114 –117               Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Centers,
Psychology of misjudgment, 28                54
Psychology of money, 177–188            Stock options, 103–104
                                        Superinvestors of Buffettville, 167,
Quality of management, 18                    173
Qwest, 148–149
                                        Tenets ( business/f inancial/
Rationality, 82, 85, 89–94                  management/value), 59
Reichardt, Carl, 67, 115, 129           Textile business, 29–30
Reinsurance, 34. (See also General Re   Thaler, Richard, 183, 184 –185,
    Corporation)                            186
Return on equity, 109–113               Theory of Investment Value, The
Ringwalt, Jack, 36, 38, 67, 97              ( Williams), 20
Risk, 165, 186–187                      Tips, when doing research, 108
RJR Nabisco, 145–146                    Tony Lama, 73
Roach, John, 74                         Turner, Mellisa, 77
Robinson, James, 91
Rodrigez, Alex, 37                      Underwriting philosophy, 38–39
ROE, 52                                 Unions, 116–117
Rosier, Grady, 48                       USAir, 152
Ruane, Bill, 2, 167, 169–171            US West, 148
Ruane, Cuniff & Company, 169
                                        Value:
Salomon Brothers, 152                     determining, 122–123
Saul, Julian, 83                        Value tenets, 59, 121–139
                                                              Index     245

Walton, Sam, 47                         Wells Fargo & Company, 57–58, 115
Washington Post Company, 24, 54 –57,     value of, 129–130
    64 – 65, 69, 78–79, 92–93           Williams, John Burr, 11, 15, 19–22
 dividends, 92–93                        education of, 19
 prof itability of, 101–102, 112–113,    on intrinsic value, 27, 122
      116–117, 136                      Williams Company, 153
 value of, 128–129                      Woodruff, Robert, 77
Washington Public Power supply          World Book Encyclopedia, 44
    System ( WPPSS), 143–145
